Jim Dalton, agricultural RFID specialist

Jim:  I am the CEO of FarmEx, we're an agricultural market research firm, and and also one of the analysts here. So we’ve been looking at RFID for 13 years and assessing what’s going on in the area and all the different markets it is applied to.  So we are a market research firm.  To start off, perhaps I can talk a bit about the background of RFID in animal tagging?

Q:  Yeah, that would be great.

Jim:  So up until now its main use has been to track animals.  And these would be in the form of short range tags, as you know well, but the primary focus here has been to track them.  In some countries, it is a legal mandate to do that.  So in places like you see them in Australia where they are terrified about disease, they want full traceability, so if there is disease they can contain it, and they can see where those animals have been rather than have a situation we had in the UK a decade ago with the mad cow.

So that has been the primary use, and these have been fairly small tags, they are a couple of dollars each and they are injected into the animal or put on to an ear tag.  But the recent developments with RTLS has been to monitor the movements of these animals in real time over a much longer range.  That calls for much more sophisticated tags, in other words, high cost, but it gives you real time capabilities, you can see exactly where that cow or pig or whatever with the tagging has moved.

It is not predominantly being used to track animals. It can be used to do that. But the existing solutions are very good, and they are ingrained and they suffer from short range but they are good enough for most applications.  But RTLS we’ve seen is a different application which is to monitor health of the animals so by being able to track it and look where it moves, you can automatically detect early on if there are signs of the animal being ill, and that is a software so it looks at how the animal has been moving and if it detects any strange behavior, that can be automatically alerted.

That means more sophisticated tags, so higher cost, but you can see where the animal moves and how its behaviour changes. If the software detects anything unusual, such as signs of illness, it can send an automatic alert.

The benefit which is claimed by the people selling it is that you can then save money on medicalcosts, and you can identify sick animals before it gets too bad, they can be treated or removed from the rest; you don’t have to treat all the rest that have been in contact with it.  You can also use RTLS for tracking as well, but the way, as I’m sure you know RTLS works it is meant for more confined areas so you can track it within a pen or a yard, but the purpose of the earlier form of RFID is really a passport, if you like.

So as one supplier buys an animal, the electronic identity moves over and that record is kept on a database.  So there are two quite different reasons to using different types of RFID systems.  And the RTLS solutions have been available for a while. So the technology is not particularly new.  People have been using the technology for some time, and so the key issue I think in using it in the animal market really comes down to one of three things:  It is effectively cost.  So will the cost of implementing the system get a payback for whoever does it?  And that’s quite hard to measure because the cited benefits of things like knowledge of animals getting sick, and that you can save on medicine costs.  But that varies.  How many animals get sick?

In some countries it’s a legal requirement. The idea is to give every animal a kind of passport, so if there’s an outbreak you know where it has been and who it has been in contact with

So a lot of companies, I think are doing trials right now.  It is still fairly embryonic with RTLS and they are trying to prove that there is a payback and what that payback period is.  Which will have some degree of variance.

.  It is still fairly embryonic with RTLS and they are trying to prove that there is a payback and what that payback period is.  Which will have some degree of variance. .  It is still fairly embryonic with RTLS and they are trying to prove that there is a payback and what that payback period is.  Which will have some degree of variance.  So a number of these trials have to happen, and the companies you’ve mentioned are well into doing those trials. But I think cost is the big issue.  But I suspect with the current cost in RTLS solutions, people will not necessarily implement it unless there is a bit of a nudge from legislation.  And that could be indirectly as is the case now in Europe where I think new EU rules coming into place from this year say that various animals need to have free range time, and so it is indirect in the way that there are very few technologies that can really enable that, and RTLS is probably the best option to do it.  And so that’s why people are looking at it.

So indirectly, even though it has always been around for some time, we haven’t seen much happen in agriculture with RTLS but we are now seeing more of it because of the CE regulation and I think that can be proven because we see a lot more happening in Europe than places that don’t have that legislation. But the other avenue eventually could be that governments mandate it in the same way some governments mandated the use of passive RFID to track cows and cattle and so did New Zealand, and so that could be well be feasible.

And a lot of this is spurned on at the moment by the recent horse meat scares where there is just … there is a huge problem where there is a lack of traceability or knowledge where your food came from is a big problem, and RFID can help tackle that.  So it could be with things like that, the governments push this more but I think left to their own devices, the farmers who would implement it would come down to the payback that they would see.  But I think legislation will help push this along.

I think the technology is very strong

And there is a range of options available. Some do ultra-wideband which gives you high precision in terms of location, but usually, not always, that comes at a higher price point than others which are less accurate.

So there are a few different technology options.

Q: Right.  What is your gut feeling in terms of cost and implementation and whether it is actually worth farmers using this technology?

Jim:  I think that is it tricky.  Because I don’t know the cost of the medicines involved, and these are not spoken to a few of the players, it is still fairly early days for them, they’ve done a few trials but getting concrete data is quite hard.  We’ve looked to the farming industry for some time, and I think the general thing that I have found is that you have got proactive people who dive in and they are happy to invest in technology and they see the benefit, which is the minority unfortunately.  And the majority of people who will resist unless they are forced to do it.  Just because this wouldn’t work for them.

It is more of a capital investment, there are uncertainties about the payback.  There’s also… your infrastructure has got to be in place… to change the whole methods which they deal with animals.  So it is not a trivial thing to do.  If they can get over the curve, I think they will see strong paybacks but like a lot of RF implementation there is this barrier to get over, and legislation is very good at pushing people over that barrier.  Without legislation, I suspect that the adoption will be much slower; certainly with legislation it will be much faster.

It’s still fairly early days. A lot of trials are happening to prove whether the benefits outweigh the cost. For some farmers, I think legislation will be the nudge that gets them to invest.

Q:  So I mean apart from the two companies that I mentioned, are there other companies investing in this area?

Jim:  There are a few different providers of the technology and they vary from companies right at the start of the value chain who make the basic components for the tags.  So there are people like the Irish company DecaWave for example, who make silicon chips which are then boards and can be integrated into tags.  The people making the tags are companies like Nanotron in Germany; the other one is Ubisense in Cambridge in the UK.  There is another UK company Omnisense O-M-N-I SENSE.  And so they supply full systems whether they are ultra-wideband or different frequencies. And then you have the integrating companies, so all the farming companies.  Sometimes the systems supplier will work directly with farms.  In other cases, they go through reseller or system integrator.

Q:  Yeah. That’s great.  You’ve covered a lot there.  \_\_\_\_9:01 these questions here, what hasn’t really been covered.  What are the main problems you think with this technology?

Jim:  But I think fundamentally the issue is the cost of the overall system.  And that is the issue.  So certainly there are strong paybacks.  And I recently met with Useful (you might be able to verify it) but I think if I heard right, they told me that they can even detect when an animal is pregnant just by how it moves.

Q: That is what they told me, yeah.

Jim:  Which is quite exciting.  What that means to a farmer in terms of money saved, I am not entirely sure on this, I haven’t done that level of work with them, but I think it certainly looks very promising.  But the issue is: Will farmers place this on their own, or will it come from legislation.  I think this is almost bit of a nonissue because legislation is pushing this ahead, with legislation in the EU, and I think other countries will probably follow.

Q:  Yeah.  Now the two companies I spoke to, the main difference, as far as I could say, (I haven’t spoken to \_\_\_\_10:44 yet though, I am speaking to them this evening actually because they were out for the day), was this difference between and UWB and 2.4 I was told, I am not entirely sure what that means.

Jim:  Sure.  So they are the frequencies at which the systems work.  It is just the rate.  The radiofrequency sent out by the transmitter and the tag; so 2.4 gigahertz is the same frequency that Wi-Fi works at for example; an ultra-wideband is a higher frequency.  It varies but it is typically between say 4 to 8 gigahertz. And generally the differences between the two systems are that ultra-wideband would be more accurate, because what you find that when the location works, is you have several transmitters emitting a signal; you have a tag which responds back, and several transmitters look for the incoming signal from that tag. And then they triangulate the position of the tag in software.

At 2.4 gigahertz, what happens is that… that would be very accurate say in an open field, but when you go into environments where you may have walls or you may have fluid you start to get interference patterns, so you might have the signal coming directly from the tag but also bouncing off the back of a wall, so the system has to try and work out what is the actual signal versus what is the reflection. And that is what causes the inaccuracy.  In ultra-wideband the system is more accurate because rather than being a single frequency, there are a range of frequencies, so now it is not putting out one frequency it is putting out multiple frequencies, and the readers are detecting multiple frequencies, and so they can filter out the noise a lot better. So that gives them more accuracy but it comes at a higher cost.

Q:  Right got you.

Jim:  So that is the main difference between the systems.  I think the main differentiation is performance versus cost generally. I think it will depend on a case by case basis which is better, because where you have a very dense environment with a lot of cattle, then you may want ultra-wideband system or if it is an open field and not very much cattle, then the cheaper system may do.  So that is one point.  I think the other point is standardization.  With animal tracking which is being done with simpler cheaper RFID for many years, that is being standardized, governments have collaborated with each other so that when one farmer sells their animals to another farmer, they read this with their readers, but it will work, because all the tags and readers and the backend database conforms to a particular standard.  And that is needed for larger open systems.  With RTLS that doesn’t exist yet.

And these two systems are incompatible.  So you couldn’t take a system from one company say tags from one company and apply that to a scenario where you are using infrastructure from another company.  So that is perhaps the limitation of RTLS right now but it is exactly what passive RFID experienced 10 years ago when it went through the same thing.  And later down the line, governments may enforce a standard but it could be that the standard is not needed because unlike passive RFID here it is just a farmer looking at his own cattle and he will probably remove the tags and reuse them when he sells his cattle on.  So maybe a standard isn’t needed, but these are not compatible systems.

So that now leads on to an issue about the supplier, where is the supply base, can they service companies in the farms, in the country, are they big enough that they are not a startup and they can supply however many tags and readers, and they will be around in ten years and not go bust if they are a small tiHe any company.  So that brings issues like that to some farmers.  Because of course, they wouldn’t want to spend a lot of money on the system for them to be locked into one supplier, and that supplier may not be around, or may not be able to service them where they are based geographically.