## DEGENERATE POISSON ALGEBRAS AND DERIVED POISSON DEGENERACY LOCI

## GRIGORII KONOVALOV

Abstract. This paper originated as an attempt to answer a question: what are the natural derived structures on Poisson degeneracy loci? We argue that the question could be possibly answered via a construction of differential graded operads that 'naturally' act on the degeneracy loci. For each m ≥ 0, we suggest what looks like a reasonable condition for a Poisson structure on a commutative differential graded algebra to be m -degenerate, i.e. to 'have rank ≤ 2 m '. That condition will turn out to be a universal property of the operad that controls such Poisson algebras; we denote that operad P ≤ m 1 . We prove that the operad P ≤ m 1 does in fact exist, and we write an explicit simplicial resolution of it. The latter, in particular, will allow us to show that P ≤ m 1 sits in non-positive cohomological degrees and to compute H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ).

## 1. Introduction

Let X be a smooth algebraic variety over a base field k , char( k ) = 0, equipped with an algebraic Poisson structure, which is given by a Poisson bivector field

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Among Poisson subschemes in ( X,π X ) degeneracy loci are distinguished ones. They could be defined as follows.

Definition 1.1 . As a subset in X , the m-degeneracy locus consists of points where rank of π X is not greater than 2 m . (Note that π X is a skew field, so its rank is always even.) Moreover, as a subscheme in X , D m ( X,π X ) is defined as the vanishing locus of the section

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is easily seen that the Poisson structure restricts on D m ( X,π X ) for each m . The 0-degeneracy locus D 0 ( X,π X ) is also sometimes called Poisson vanishing locus; the restriction of the Poisson structure to the vanishing locus is trivial. /diamondmath

The geometry of Poisson degeneracy loci was extensively studied in a number of works, including [1], [2], [3]. This paper aims towards contributing to this study from the perspective of homotopical algebra and derived algebraic geometry, motivation for which was provided by a remarkable conjecture, made by A. Bondal, claiming that the degeneracy loci are especially large in some cases.

Conjecture 1.2 (A. Bondal, [1]) . Let X be a complex smooth connected Fano variety, equipped with a Poisson structure π X . Then, for each integer k ≥ 0 such that 2 k &lt; dim( X ) , degeneracy locus D 2 k ( X,π X ) has a component of dimension ≥ 2 k +1 .

It is worth noting that the literature contains some evidence favoring Bondal's Conjecture. In particular, it was proved in [1] for X of dimension 3 and in [3] for X of dimension 4.

This suggests that the defining property of the degeneracy locus is somewhat non-transversal, which might mean that there is a meaningful derived analog of the notion of Poisson degeneracy locus that has better transversality, as it usually happens when we replace classical notions with their derived versions. From this geometric perspective, the main accomplishment of this paper is a definition of derived Poisson degeneracy loci as derived Poisson

Date : March 2023.

Key words and phrases. operads, Poisson structures, Poisson degeneracy loci.

The author is a research intern at the Center for Fundamental Mathematics, grant number FSMG-2023-0013, MIPT, Moscow; and a PhD student at Skoltech and at the HSE University, which are also located in Moscow.

subschemes in X in such a way that they refine the classical degeneracy loci, see Definition 5.2 and Proposition 5.3. In other words, this paper aims at extending the notion of Poisson degeneracy loci to the field of derived Poisson geometry, foundations for which were established in a number of works - [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], to name a few.

Our methodology extensively relies on the theory of algebraic operads. Below, we would like to sketch the main ideas that will form a core of our constructions.

Let us consider the case of the vanishing locus first. Let A be a Poisson algebra over the base field k . One sees that the vanishing locus D 0 ⊂ Spec( A ) of the Poisson scheme Spec( A ) is given by Spec( A/ ( { A,A } )) ⊂ Spec( A ), where ( { A,A } ) ⊂ A denotes the ideal in A generated by the brackets. In other terms, we consider the Poisson algebra A as an algebra over the Poisson operad P 1 . Then the commutative algebra A/ ( { A,A } ) can be identified with the induction of A along the morphism of operads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which maps the bracket to zero. Moreover, the factor map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which corresponds to the embedding D 0 ⊂ Spec( A ), can be identified as the unit map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which corresponds to the morphism of operads (1.3).

This suggests a definition for the derived Poisson vanishing locus as the derived induction along the map (1.3). Moreover, this suggests the following plan for defining the derived Poisson degeneracy loci: first, for each m ≥ 1, define an operad P ≤ m 1 together with a morphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by definition, taking the derived m-th degeneracy locus of a Poisson algebra corresponds to taking the derived induction along the morphism of operads (1.4). Heuristically, one should think of the operad P ≤ m 1 as of an operad whose algebras are Poisson algebras with the bracket having rank ≤ 2 m . In addition, the forgetful functor corresponding to the morphism (1.4) forgets this degeneracy datum.

It will be handy for us to construct P ≤ m 1 by a universal property, which will be similar to the universal property of P 1 studied by V. Melani, [5]. Melani constructed a functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(we let ourselves slightly simplify Melani's notation because, at the moment, we only need to communicate a small portion of the information the original notation stores) that takes an operad O , equipped with a map µ : Comm →O , to the graded complex of anti-symmetric operations of O that are multi-derivations with respect to µ . That complex was equipped with a Lie bracket, which was a restriction of the convolution Lie braket of Conv(coComm , O{1 } ). In [5], the following characterization of P 1 was proved.

Theorem (Theorem 2.11, [5]) . The fiber at µ of the map of simplicial sets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k (2)[ -1] is trivial graded Lie albegra sitting in weight degree 2 and cohomological degree 1, Q ( k (2)[ -1]) and Q ( P 1 ) are some nice resolutions of k (2)[ -1] and P 1 respectively chosen somewhat consistently with respect to each other.

Example 1.6 . Let A be a cofibrant commutative differential graded algebra. In this case the endomorphism operad End A is equipped with a map Comm → End A that corresponds to the commutative structure on A , and, of the adjuntion

is isomorphic to

as was shown in [5], application of MD ( -) to the object End A ∈ Op Comm / yields the graded Lie algebra of polyvector fields whose Lie bracket is given by the Schouten bracket and whose grading is given by the symmteric powers. So in this case Melani's Theorem tells us that Poisson structures on A are in a bijection to the set of maps

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the homotopy category of graded dg Lie algebras. Among other things, any such map induces a map of complexes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which gives the underlying bivector of the Poisson structure.

/diamondmath

In addition, we would like to note that MD ( O )[ -1] could be equipped with a commutative product, which is compatible with the Lie bracket. This makes MD ( O )[ -1] into a graded P 2 -algebra; therefore, we can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k [ x ] is the free graded P 2 -algebra generated by the trivial Lie algebra k (2)[ -1] - so the generator x has weight degree 2 and cohomological degree 2. It turns out that the product on MD ( O )[ -1] under the isomorphism of Example 1.6 becomes the usual product of polyvector fields; in particular, the element

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

corresponds to the ( m +1)-th skew power of the Poisson bivector. This suggests to define P ≤ m 1 by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

However, the formula (1.7) does not give us a good definition for the following reason: the functor MD does not preserve quasi-isomorphisms.

Nonetheless, in Section 4.2 - see Definition 4.11, we construct a functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is similar to MD in its essence: for instance, for a commuataive algebra A , Pol(End A ) is quasi-isomorphic to the derived algebra of polyvector fields of A , see Theorem 4.5. We prove in Proposition 4.13 that the functor Pol preserves quasi-isomorphisms; therefore, it induces a functor between localizations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, in Proposition 4.13, we also show that the functor (1.8) admits a left-adjoint

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which allows us to define the m -degenerate Poisson operad P ≤ m 1 as F ( k [ x ] / ( x m +1 )) - see Definition 4.21; by that definition, P ≤ m 1 satisfies the following universal property:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, in Proposition 4.15, we show that there is an equivalence F ( k [ x ]) /similarequal P 1 compatible with the maps from Comm, so that the factor map k [ x ] → k [ x ] / ( x m +1 ) induces a map P 1 → P ≤ m 1 , precomposition with which forgets the degeneracy datum of the degenerate Poisson structure.

For a commutative dg-algebra A , the space Map Op Comm ( P ≤ m 1 , End A ) of m -degenerate Poisson structures on A is computed as Map A lg gr P 2 ( k [ x ] / ( x m +1 ) , P ol(End A )) with the underlying Poisson structure given by the map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us add that in this case there is an equivalence of graded P 2 -algebras in particular, for the underlying Poisson structure we still have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Notation and conventions.

- We work over a base field k of characteristic zero.
- Given a relative category ( C, W ), we denote the underlying ∞-category by C [ W -1 ].
- We denote by dg k the categry of chain complexes over k.
- The localized category dg k [ W -1 qis ] is denoted by dg k .
- Comm denotes the operad in chain complexes whose algebras are unital (strictly) commutative algebras in chain complexes. In particular, the underlying symmetric sequence is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where all symmetric groups act trivially. The non-unital variant of the commutative operad is denoted by Comm nu .

- Lie denotes the operad in chain complexes whose algebras are the differential graded Lie algebras.
- P 1 denotes the operad whose algebras are the unital dg-Poisson algebras; the non-unital variant is denoted P nu 1 . The underlying symmetric sequences are given by

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

see [9], Section 13.3 for a description of the Poisson operad and Section 5.1 for a description of the composition monoidal product.

- P 2 denotes the Gerstenhaber operad; its algebras are (shifted) Poisson algebras whose Lie bracket has cohomological degree 1. An example of a P 2 -algebra is the algebra of polyvector fields of a commutative algebra A

equipped with the Schouten bracket. The non-unital variant of the operad is denoted by P nu 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- At some point, we will need to work with Lie and P nu 2 algebras in chain complexes equipped with additional grading. We will adopt a standard convention that the Lie bracket has weight -1 with respect the grading. We will use a superscript gr to emphasize the fact that we are working with graded algebras. For example, the algebra of polyvector fields of a commutative algebra A
- is graded by the symmetric powers, so we write ⊕ n ≥ 0 Sym n A ( T A [ -1]) ∈ Alg gr P nu 2 . · We will also be interested in graded Ω(co P 2 { 2 } )-algebras. Operad Ω(co P 2 { 2 } ) is a quasi-free model of the operad P nu 2 , it is generated by the symmetric sequence co P 2 { 2 } [ -1] and equipped with the cobar differential. We refer to Section 2.3 and Section 2.4 for some details and references regarding the definition of the operad Ω(co P 2 { 2 } ). The weight of a generator, which is an element of co P 2 { 2 } [ -1], is defined to be equal to 1 minus the arity of the generator's coComm-part. In other words, according to this definition, the Lie bracket has weight -1, the product has weight 0, weights of the other generators are defined accordingly.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- In Example 4.19 and Example 4.27, we will need to perform computations which involve permutations. We would like to fix the following notation for the permutations: an element σ ∈ S n is denoted by the unique n -tuple ( i 1 , i 2 , . . . , i n ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the right-hand side involves the usual action of S n on n -tuples. For example, the transposition permuting the first two elements is denoted by (2 , 1 , 3 , 4 , . . . , n ).

- Sh( i, j ) ⊂ S n is the subset of ( i, j )-shuffles, it consists of permutations σ ∈ S n satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For example, the permutation (1 , 3 , 2 , 4) ∈ S 4 is a (2 , 2)-shuffle; the permutation (2 , 1 , 3 , 4) ∈ S 4 is not a (2 , 2)-shuffle.

## Structure of the paper.

In Section 2, we recall a few standard facts from the theory of algebraic operads. In Section 3, we give a detailed look at the derived vanishing locus, defined as the derived induction along the map of operads (1.3). Specifically, we provide a general formula for the derived vanishing locus and we compute it in one particular case, in which the vanishing locus can be computed explicitly. In Section 4, we define and study the functor of polyvectors Pol: Op Comm / -→ Alg gr P 2 , which then allows us to define the degenerate Poisson operads. In addition, for each m &gt; 0, we construct a simplicial resolution of the m -degenerate Poisson operad P ≤ m 1 and compute H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ). Finally, in Section 5, we answer a few basic questions about the degeneracy loci regarding their relation to the newly defined degenerate Poisson operads. Specifically, we prove that the classical induction along the map P 1 → H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) gives us the classical degeneracy locus as defined in 1.1, and that H 0 ( -) of the derived degeneracy locus is given by the classical degeneracy locus.

Acknowledgements. The author is indebted to Alexey Bondal and Christopher Brav for their constant support and numerous helpful discussions throughout the work on this paper, and, in particular, to Christopher Brav for reading the draft and making a few valuable suggestions. Also, the author kindly acknowledges that he benefited from a few conversations with Alexey Rosly and Artem Prikhodko. Besides, the author would like to thank Alexey Bondal for introducing him to the Poisson degeneracy loci and, in particular, to Conjecture 1.2, which inspired many of the ideas expressed in this paper. The project was partially supported by RFBR and CNRS, grant number 21-51-15005.

## 2. Basic facts and definitions

2.1. Operads. In this paper, we work with differential graded operads, i.e. operads in chain complexes over the base field k . By an operad we always mean a dg-operad; we denote the category of operads by Op. Our definitions and notations for operads mostly follow those of [9].

Given a symmetric sequence M ∈ SymSeq, its shift M [ n ] ∈ SymSeq is defined by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that, even if there was an operad structure on the symmetric sequence M , there are no canonical operad structure on M [ n ] for non-zero n - in fact, there could be no operad structure on M [ n ] at all. However, given a symmetric sequence M , another symmetric sequence M { n } ∈ SymSeq is defined by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where sgn m denotes the sign representation of the symmetric group S m ; an operad (cooperad) structure on M canonically induces one on M { n } , see [9], Section 5.3.2.

and or, equivalently,

- 2.2. Algebras over an operad. Given an operad O , we denote by Alg O its category of algebras in chain complexes. Similarly, for a cooperad C , we denote by CoAlg C its category of conilpotent coalgebras in chain complexes. A map of operads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the right adjoint, denoted by oblv O 1 O 2 , is the forgetful functor. This Quillen adjunction induces an adjunction between the underlying ∞-categories:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W qis denotes a class of morphisms which are quasi-isomorphisms. In a special case where O 1 = 1 is the trivial operad, whose category of algebras Alg 1 is the category of complexes dg k , we adopt the following notation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denotes the adjuntion between ∞-categories.

It is a standard fact that oblv O 1 O 2 is conservative and preserves sifted colimits, see, for example, [10], Chapter 6, Section 1.1.

- 2.3. Koszul duality. Recall that an operad O is called augmented if it is equipped with a map of operads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 1 ∈ Op is the trivial operad. Typically, operads of interest to us that control non-unital algebras have O (0) = 0 and O (1) ∼ = k ; such an operad admits a unique augmentation. Examples include Ass nu , Comm nu , Lie, and P nu 1 .

We refer to [9], Section 7, for the Koszul duality theory for augmented operads. Given a quadratic augmented operad O , the theory produces a quadratic coaugmented cooperad C together with a morphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ω denotes the operadic cobar construction, see [9], Section 6.5, which maps a coaugmented cooperad into a quasi-free operad generated by C [ -1] whose differential comes from the differential of C and the coproduct of C . Operad O is called Koszul if the map (2.1) is a quasi-isomorphism; in that case the cooperad C is said to be Koszul dual to the operad O , and (2.1) gives us a quasi-free resolution of the operad O . All of the concrete operads mentioned in the previous paragraph are known to be Koszul.

Given a Koszul dual pair C - O , there is an adjoint pair

Ω

O

: CoAlg

C

/arrowparrrightleft

Alg

O

: B

O

.

The right adjoint is called bar construction, it maps an algebra A ∈ Alg O to a quasi-cofree coalgebra equipped with the bar differential, that is combined from the differential on A and the algebra structure on A , see [9], Section 11. Similarly, Ω O maps a coalgebra C ∈ CoAlg C to a quasi-free algebra

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

equipped with the cobar differential. Recall that a morphism in CoAlg C is defined to be a weak-equivalence if the cobar construction Ω O maps it into a quasi-isomorphism. Such weak-equivalences form a subcategory W Kos ⊂ CoAlg C . It turns out that, for any algebra, A ∈ Alg O , the adjunction map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a quasi-isomorphism; therefore, functors Ω O and B O preserve weak-equivalences, and the resulting adjunction

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induces a Quillen adjuntion denotes the Quillen adjunction, and

is an equivalence of ∞-categories, see, for example, [11], Proposition 1.7.

It happens that opeards that control unital algebras, such as Ass, Comm, and P 1 , tend to not admit an augmentation. Yet, developed in [12], there is a Koszul duality theory for semi-agumented operads: an operad O is called semi-augmented if it is equipped with a map of the underlying symmetric sequences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

not necessarily commuting with the differentials, such that the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is identity. The Koszul duality for semi-augmented operads works identically to the Koszul duality for augemented operads, except the differential of the Koszul dual cooperad C does not squares to zero, and a curving C (1) -→ k [2] is introduced to account for that, see [12], Section 3.

- 2.4. Examples. First, we will need the following fact, which has become classics by now and is found in [9], Section 13, that operads Comm nu , Lie, P nu 1 , P nu 2 are Koszul, and their Koszul dual are coLie { 1 } , coComm { 1 } , co P 1 { 1 } , and co P 2 { 2 } respectively.
- It follows from [12], Proposition 4.3.3, that operads Comm and P 1 are also Koszul. Now, in analogy with the case of the associative operad, which was studied in [12], Section 6, we would like to sketch a description of the Koszul dual of Comm; it is usually denoted by coLie θ { 1 } . In accordance with [12], Section 4, the underlying graded cooperad of coLie θ { 1 } is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where co E 0 is the cooperad of complexes equipped with a functional and ⊕ denotes the product in the category of conilponent cooperads, i.e. the conilpotent cooperad cogenerated by coLie { 1 } and co E 0 {-1 } . Moreover, coLie θ { 1 } is equipped with a trivial differential and a curving

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

to -1. A coalgebra over coLie θ is a Lie coalgebra C equipped with a degree 1 derivation d : C → C and a curving θ : C → k [2] that satisfy relations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Coalgebras over coLie θ are called curved Lie coalgebras.

The Koszul dual of P 1 admits a similar describtion, see [11], Section 1.4. It is denoted by co P θ 1 { 1 } , and its coalgebras are shifted curved Poisson coalgebras.

- 2.5. Hopf cooperads. Recall that the category of cooperads has a symmetric monoidal structure given by the Hadamard product. A Hopf cooperad is a commutative algebra in cooperads. For example, the cocomuutative counital cooperad coComm cu is the monoidal unit for that symmetric monoidal structure; thus, the cooperad coComm cu is canonically a Hopf cooperad. Another example, which is of a particular interest to us, is that setting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where δ ∈ co P cu 1 (2) is the Lie cobracket, makes the cooperad co P cu 1 into a Hopf cooperad.

that sends the cooperation and

2.6. Brace construction. Let C be a cooperad, and O be an operad. Recall that one can form the convolution pre-Lie algebra whose pre-Lie product is given by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ (1) and ∆ (1) denote the infinitesimal composition and the infinitesimal decomposition of O and C correspondingly, see [9], Section 6.4.2.

According to [13], the operad preLie that controls pre-Lie algebras has the following description: preLie( n ) is the vector space spanned by rooted trees with n vertices labeled by numbers from 1 to n , and the symmetric group S n acts on preLie( n ) by permutation of the labels. Given a pair of trees T ∈ preLie( n ) and S ∈ preLie( m ), their composition T ◦ i S is defined by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where In( T, i ) denotes the set incoming edges at the vertex i , and T ◦ f i S ∈ preLie( n + m -1) denotes the rooted tree obtained by replacing the vertex i of the tree T by the tree S and attaching edges from In( T, i ) via the map f ; the root of T ◦ f i S is given by the of root of T in case that i is not the root of T and by the root of S otherwise. For example, and

Under this description, the pre-Lie product corresponds to the tree 1 2 ∈ preLie(2).

<!-- image -->

Now let C be a Hopf cooperad such that C (0) ∼ = C (1) ∼ = k . In this case, D. Calaque and T. Willwacher, [14], extended the action of the operad preLie on the convolution algebra (2.2) to an action of an operad preLie C , whose definition we now would like to sketch. The vector space preLie C ( n ) is spanned by the same rooted trees that span preLie( n ), but now each vertex of a tree is additionally labeled by an element of C of arity equal to the in-degree of the vertex. The composition coincides with that of preLie on the underlying trees and uses cooperad and Hopf structures on C to act on the labels, see [14], Section 3. The operad preLie C is generated by labeled trees of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

Action of the generators of preLie C on the convolution algebra

.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has the following description: tree (2.3) labeled by an element c ∈ C ( k ) maps a tuple ( f, f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f k ), f ∈ Hom S k + j ( C ( k + j ) , O ( k + j )), f i ∈ Hom S j i ( C ( j i ) , O ( j i )), into

<!-- image -->

where ˜ c denotes the image of c under the map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

f (˜ c · -) denotes the compostion of multiplication by ˜ c and f , and the action of the tree on the tuple is given by the underlying action of preLie.

Given a Maurer-Cartan element µ in a dg-Lie algebra, the same Lie algebra equipped with a new differential d + [ µ, -] is, in fact, a dg-Lie algebra. However, a pre-Lie structure in general does not descend to a pre-Lie structure on the twisted Lie algebra, let alone a preLie C -structure. Nevertheless, V. Dolgushev and T. Willwacher, [15], introduced a construction called operadic twisting, which, in particular, when applied to preLie C , tells us which operad acts on the convolution algebra Conv( C , O ) twisted by a Maurer-Cartan element.

Now, following [14], we would like to describe that operad, denoted Br C , together with its action on the twisted convolution algebra. We will focus on a special case where C = co P cu 1 , which is of a special interest to us. Operad Br co P cu 1 is generated by trees

,

<!-- image -->

where the former tree is labeled by an element from co P cu 1 ( k ), and the latter tree has at least 2 leaves and is labeled by an element from co P 1 ( k )[ -1]. The latter tree has arity k ; in terms of the underlying preLie C -action on the underlying graded vector space, its action on a tuple ( f 1 , . . . , f k ), f i ∈ Hom S j i (co P cu 1 { 1 } ( j i ) , O ( j i )), is given by

<!-- image -->

where the root of the tree is labeled by the same element from co P 1 ( k )[ -1], and µ denotes the Maurer-Cartan element. Operadic composition of Br co P cu 1 is similar to that of preLie C . Differential on Br co P cu 1 is roughly given by the following formulas:

and

<!-- image -->

on the labels the differential acts as the cobar differential, see [15], Section 8.

∑

Drawing inspiration from D. Tamarkin's work [16], D. Calaque and T. Willwacher, [14], Section 3.2, constructed a map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The map (2.4) acts on generators as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 1) a generator X 1 . . . X k ∈ coLie( k ) ⊂ co P 2 { 1 } ( k ) is send to the tree

<!-- image -->

labeled by the element s -1 X 1 . . . X k ∈ coLie( k )[ -1] ⊂ co P 1 ( k )[ -1], where by X 1 . . . X k we denote the image of the k -ary comultiplication under the projection coAss( k ) → coLie( k );

- 2) the generator X 1 ∧ X 2 ∈ coComm { 1 } (2) ⊂ co P 2 { 1 } (2) is send to the Lie bracket
- 3) a generator X 1 ∧ X 2 . . . X k ∈ co P 2 { 1 } ( k ), k ≥ 3, is send to the tree

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

labeled by the element s -1 X 2 . . . X k ∈ coLie( k -1)[ -1] ⊂ co P 1 ( k -1)[ -1];

- 4) the rest of the generators are send to zero.

Theorem 2.5 ([14], Theorem 4) . The map (2.4) is a quasi-isomorphism.

Let us note that, via the map (2.4), the action of Br co P cu 1 on Conv(co P cu 1 { 1 } , O ) gives rise to an action of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a quasi-free model of P nu 2 , on Conv(co P cu 1 { 1 } , O )[ -1].

Example 2.6 (see Section 4.1 for details) . For example, if O = End A for a commutative dg-algebra A , then the convolution algebra Conv(co P cu 1 { 1 } , End A )[ -1] twisted by the commutative structure on A becomes quasiisomorphic as a (homotopy) P nu 2 -algebra to the completed algebra of polyvector fields on A .

/diamondmath

Remark 2.7 . Let us note that we could have started with a non-completed convolution Lie algebra

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the operad preLie C still acts on this non-completed version. Moreover, we can twist the non-comleted convolution algebra by an MC element that sits in a finite number of weight degrees, and then the operad Br C acts on that twisted non-completed convolution algebra. /diamondmath

## 3. Derived Poisson vanishing locus

In this section we would like to give an explicit description to the functor of vanishing locus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is given by derived induction along the natural map of operads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is identity on the multiplication and sends the lie bracket to zero.

Recall that, for a Koszul dual pair C - O , there is a bar-cobar adjunction

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which descends to an adjoint equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d15

/d15

/d47

/d47

where the left vertical arrow is the forgetful functor, is commutative.

Proof. The diagram consists of left adjoints, so it suffices to check that the diagram of their right adjoints

/d79

/d79

/d111

/d111

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d111

/d111

is also commutative. This diagram is induced by the corresponding diagram of 1-categories

/d79

/d79

/d111

/d111

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d111

/d111

,

all of whose arrows preserve weak equivalences. So it is enough to check commutativity of the latter, which easily follows from the definition of the bar construction. /square

Corollary 3.2. Given a Poisson algebra A ∈ A lg P 1 , its vanishing locus T ≤ 0 ( A ) ∈ A lg Comm is computed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we would like to consider the following example: for a Lie algebra g ∈ A lg Lie , let us consider a Poisson algebra that A = Sym k ( g ) ∈ A lg P 1 . We note that there is a commutative diagram

/d79

/d79

/d79

/d79

/d47

/d47

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

which consists of inductions along the corresponding maps of operads. Therefore, the vanishing locus T ≤ 0 (Sym k ( g )) is a free commutative algebra generated by ind Id Lie ( g ), whose computation is the purpose of the following lemma.

Lemma 3.3. There is a functorial equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C ∗ ( g ) is the reduced homological Chevalley-Eilenberg complex of g .

Lemma 3.1. Diagram

Proof.

/d15

/d15

,

Proof. It follows from the definitions that there is a commutative square

/d79

/d79

/d111

/d111

/d79

/d79

<!-- image -->

.

Passing to the localizations first, and to the left adjoints after, we obtain a commutative square

/d47

/d47

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which it follows that

/d15

/d15

/d15

/d15

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The last isomorphism oblv ◦ B Lie ( g ) ∼ = C ∗ ( g )[ -1] is basically an avatar of the definition of the Chevalley-Eilenberg complex. /square

So the following holds for the vanishing locus of Sym k ( g )

Corollary 3.4. There is a functorial isomorphism of commutative algebras

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4. Polyvectors and degenerate Poisson operads

- 4.1. Polyvectors of a cgda. Let A be a commutative dg-algebra over the base field k . There is a nice exposition in [7], Section 2.2, on how to construct, using Koszul duality, a canonical resolution of A as a mixed graded commutative dg-algebra and extract A 's cotangent and tangent complexes from it, which we now would like to recall. Let coLie be the cooperad of Lie coalgebras. Recall that its suspension coLie { 1 } is Koszul dual to the operad of non-unital commutative algebras Comm nu . As a commutative algebra, A /epsilon1 is defined by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The grading on A /epsilon1 is induced by a grading on coLie { 1 } , according to which the weight of coLie { 1 } ( n ) is set to be equal to 1 -n . The mixed differential on A /epsilon1 is defined as the bar-cobar differential, see [9], Section 11.2.

The counit morphism coLie { 1 } -→ I induces a morphism of complexes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which in turn induces a morphism of graded commutative (non-unital) algebras

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It needs to be checked directly that the latter is in fact a morphism of mixed graded commutative algebras. Then we arrive at a morphism of (non-unital) cdgas

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is a standard fact about the bar-cobar resolution that (4.1) is a quasi-isomorphism, and it was proved in [7], Lemma 2.4, that | A /epsilon1 | l is a cofibrant cdga.

Next we recall the definitions of Harrison chain and cochain complexes, whose realizations model cotangent and tangent complexes of A respectively.

Definition 4.2 . Harrison chain complex Harr · ( A,A ) ∈ Mod gr ,/epsilon1 A is defined by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Harrison cochain complex Harr · ( A,A ) ∈ Mod gr ,/epsilon1 A is defined by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

,

where the mixed structure on the convolution algebra could be checked to coincide with the Lie bracket with the MC-element corresponding to the multiplication on A . /diamondmath

Let us note that morphism of graded mixed cdgas

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

induces a morphism of A -modules

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 2.6 from [7] claims that the latter is a quasi-isomorphism provided that A is a cofibrant cgda. Applying Hom A ( , A ) to the morphism (4.3), we get a chain of quasi-isomorphisms

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, it can be checked, see [7], Proposition 2.7, that the resulting quasi-isomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respects the Lie algebra structures.

Now, given a cdga A , we want to construct a similar presentation for the graded Poisson algebra of polyvector fields on A . Let us consider a mixed graded A -module

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the mixed structure on A ⊗ k co P cu 1 { 1 } ( A ) comes from the bar differential on co P cu 1 { 1 } ( A ) corresponding to the Poisson structure on A whose bracket is trivial. Since the Lie structure on A is trivial, we get a chain of isomorphisms of graded mixed complexes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Passing to the duals and shifting by 1 to the right, we get an isomorphism of mixed graded complexes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the mixed structure on the RHS corresponds to the commutative algebra strucutre on A .

Theorem 4.5 (Higher Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg Theorem, Theorem 2 of [14]) . Under the action of the right realization, isomorphism (4.4) becomes an isomorphism of homotopy P nu 2 -algebras, where the homotopy P nu 2 -structure on the right-hand side is given by the Tamarkin-Calaque-Willwacher map (2.4).

4.2. Polyvectors of an operad. Observations made in the previous section suggest the following definition.

Definition 4.6 . Given an operad O equipped with a morphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we define a Ω(co P 2 { 2 } )-algebra as the (shifted) convolution algebra

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

twisted by a Maurer-Cartan element coming from the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Ω(co P 2 { 2 } )-algebra structure on (4.7) is given by the Tamarkin-Calaque-Willwacher map (2.4).

/diamondmath

Let us note that, because the Maurer-Cartan element has only 'degree' 2 component, for each k ≥ 3, generators of the from

<!-- image -->

act on the convolution algebra (4.7) by zero. In particular, the commutative product on ̂ Pol( O ) is strictly associative. The rest of the Ω(co P 2 { 2 } )-structure on ̂ Pol( O ) consists of a strict Lie bracket and witnesses of the bracket being a homotopy bi-derivation with respect to the product, see the description of the map (2.4).

/d79

<!-- image -->

/d79

and, from now on, we will write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 4.8 . Note that, because co P cu 1 ∼ = coComm cu ◦ coLie, we have

Hom S n (co P cu 1 { 1 } ( n ) , O ( n )) ∼ =

(Note that ˜ P nu 2 is also quasi-isomorphic to P nu 2 . )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

n

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

shifted by 1 to the right and equipped with an additional grading by that k

. /diamondmath

Lemma 4.9. The action of ˜ P nu 2 on ̂ Pol( O ) preserves the subcomplex Pol( O ) ⊂ ̂ Pol( O ) . Moreover, the grading on Ω(co P 2 { 2 } ) , which we defined in Notations and Conventions at the end of Introduction, uniquely induces grading on P nu 2 , and we claim that the resulting action of P nu 2 on Pol( O ) is compatible with the gradings.

Second, the commutative product on ̂ Pol( O ) is given by the preLie-operation in which we insert the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

˜ ˜ Proof. First, it follows from the explicit formula that the Lie bracket restricts to the subcomplex Pol( O ) ⊂ ̂ Pol( O ), and moreover has degree -1 with respect to the grading.

<!-- image -->

/d47

/d47

/d79

/d79

The fact that the Lie bracket on ̂ Pol( O ) is strict will play a significant role in our constructions, so we remark that Ω(co P 2 { 2 } )-action on ̂ Pol( O ) factors through the push-out

/d47

/d47

,

as the first argument. The preLie-operation itself has degree -2 with respect to the grading, while the first argument of the preLie-operation has weight 2; this results in the commutative product on Pol( O ) having degree 0.

Finally, one argues similarly for all the distributivity witnesses, which, up to the Hopf action, are given by preLie-operations, which preserve the grading and have degrees equal to 1 minus their arity. For example, the generator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

acts by the preLie-operation

<!-- image -->

labeled by the element s -1 X 2 X 3 ∈ coLie { 1 } (2)[ -1]. The Hopf multiplication with the element s -1 X 2 X 3 has weight 1, which, together with the fact that the preLie-operation has weight -2, implies that the generator (4.10) preserves the grading and has weight -1.

/square

/diamondmath

Proposition 4.13. The functor (4.12) admits a left adjoint F: Alg gr ˜ P nu 2 -→ Op Comm / , and the resulting adjunction

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 4.11 . We denote by is a Quillen adjunction.

Recall that both of the categories are equipped with projective model structures, whose equivalences and fibrations are created by the forgetful functors to the symmetric sequences and the graded complexes correspondingly, see [17].

Let us note that the functor Pol( -) factors through the forgetful functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote by Pol nu ( -) the resulting functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Proposition 4.13. First, we note that it suffices to prove the claim for the functor Pol nu ( -). It has a left adjoint F nu , which admits the following description. Let γ ∈ Alg gr ˜ P nu 2 be a graded ˜ P nu 2 -algebra. The unit map γ -→ Pol nu (F nu ( γ ))

sends an element g ∈ γ of weight degree w into a map which corresponds to a family of operations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let { g i } i ⊂ γ be a family of homogeneus generators of algebra γ . Operad F nu ( γ ) could be described as the operad freely generated over Comm nu by operations { g c i } i,c modulo relations on g i ∈ γ rewritten operadicaly as relations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the resulting graded ˜ P nu 2 -algebra. In addition, sending O ∈ Op Comm / into Pol( O ) ∈ Alg gr ˜ P nu 2 defines a functor (4.12) Pol( -): Op Comm / → Alg gr ˜ P nu 2 .

on the operations g c i . Heuristically, for an element g ∈ γ of weight degree w , there is an anti-symmetric homotopy multi-derivation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose distributivity witnesses are given all the other g c ∈ F nu ( γ ).

Because it is clear that the functor Pol nu ( -) preserves fibrations, it remains to prove that it preserves quasiisomorphisms. Because the forgetful functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is conservative and preserves quasi-isomorphisms, it suffices to prove that the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

preserves quasi-isomorphisms. Moreover, completion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

✤

/d47

/d47

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is conservative and preserves quasi-isomorphisms. So it suffices to prove that the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

preserves quasi-isomorphisms. The latter maps an object µ : Comm nu →O into a complex

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us note that the MC-element µ is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in particular, it preserves the differential, and the Maurer-Cartan equation simplifies to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the object µ : Comm nu → O is mapped into a graded complex ⊕ n ≥ 0 Hom S n (co P cu 1 { 1 } ( n ) , O ( n )) equipped with mixed differential [ µ, -]. It remains to recall that the realization preserves quasi-isomorphisms, see [6], Section 1.3, or [7], Section 1.2.

/square

From this we conclude that the functor factors over the realization functor

Notaion 4.14 . The adjunction from Proposition 4.13 induces an adjunction

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

between ∞ -categories. Also, there is a 'non-unital' variant of this adjunction, which we write with a superscript nu:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4.3. Degenerate Poisson operads. It remains to make a few final remarks before we can define the degenerate Poisson operads. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denote the free graded P nu 2 -algebra generated by a trivial one-dimensional graded Lie algebra k (2)[ -1] sitting in weight degree 2 and cohomological degree 1.

Proposition 4.15. There is an equivalence of operads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

compatible with the structure maps from Comm .

The following lemma will help us to reduce the question to the 'non-unital' one.

Lemma 4.16. The square

/d79

/d79

/d79

/d79

/d47

<!-- image -->

/d47

/d47

is quasi-isomorphic to a homotopy push-out square.

Proof of the lemma. There is a diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

whose maps are the obvious ones defined on the generators, that resolves the diagram

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

.

Let us denote push-out of the former diagram by P . Operad P is a quasi-free operad generated by the symmetric sequence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and equipped with a cobar-type differential. In particular, there is a split injection

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

on the generators the splitting is given by the obvious map co P θ 1 { 1 } [ -1] -→ P and it is straightforward to check that the resulting map of operads is compatible with the differential. In addition, one could also check that the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is surjective, which amounts to checking that P has enough generators. We conclude that the morphism (4.17) is a quasi-isomorphism. Finally, we note that the push-out square

/d79

/d79

/d47

/d47

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

is in fact a homotopy push-out square - all the objects are cofibrant and all the maps are cofibrations. The latter follows from an explicit description of cofibrations in the model category of operads, see [17]. This concludes the proof of Lemma 4.16. /square

/d47

/d47

/d79

/d79

Proof of Proposition 4.15. First, let us prove that F nu ( free P nu 2 Lie { 1 } ( k (2)[ -2])) /similarequal P nu 1 . Let us denote by F nu Lie the left adjoint to the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The functor F nu Lie is a left Quillen functor which maps a graded Lie algebra into the operad generated over Comm nu by homotopy multi-derivations corresponding to elements of the Lie algebra modulo relations that come from the Lie bracket and the differential of the Lie algebra.

Recall from [5], Section 4, that Lie algebra k (2)[ -1] has a cofibrant resolution Q ( k (2)[ -1]) which is freely generated by elements p i for i = 2 , 3 , 4 , . . . , such that p i has cohomological degree 1 and weight degree i ; the differential acts on the generators by the formula

The map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

sends p 2 to the generator of k (2)[ -1] and the other generators to zero.

We get an equivalence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the latter is freely generated over Comm nu by the following set of operations: for each n ≥ 2, there is a family of operations p c n labeled by cooperations arity of the operation p c n is equal to arity of the cooperation c , the symmetric group acts on { p c n } c via acting on the labels. In particular, we see that the underlying graded operad of F nu Lie ( Q ( k (2)[ -1])) is isomorphic to the underlying graded operad of the push-out of the diagram

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

.

It is a straightforward computation that this isomorphism is compatible with the differential; to give an idea of how the computation is performed, in Example 4.19, we compute action of the differential of F nu Lie ( Q ( k (2)[ -1])) on a few simple generators. On the other hand, the push-out of the diagram (4.18) is a cofibrant over Comm nu model of P nu 1 ; let us denote this model P nu . So far, we proved that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let us denote by P the push-out of the diagram

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

.

It needs to be proved that P is quasi-isomorphic to P 1 . But it follows from the definitions and the proof of Lemma 4.16 that the operad P fits into push-out square

/d79

/d79

/d47

/d47

/d79

/d79

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d47

/d47

.

/square

Example 4.19 . To simplify the notation, in this example, we would like to denote the operad F nu Lie ( Q ( k (2)[ -1])) by O . Here our goal will be to compute how the differential d O acts on a few simple generators. Recall that O is quasi-freely generated over Comm nu by the symmetric sequence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

maps a generator p n ∈ Q ( k (2)[ -1]) into a map which we also denote by p n ; this map sends a cooperation into the corresponding generator of O . Also, recall that we have a map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that corresponds to the commutative product Comm nu (2) ⊂ O (2); the differential on Pol nu ( O ) involves taking the bracket with µ . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denote the cocommutative cobracket and the Lie cobracket correspondingly. Also, let ∆ 3 ∈ co P 1 { 1 } (3) denote the cooperation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 1) p 2 (∆ 2 ) ∈ O (2) is an anti-symmetric binary operation of cohomological degree 0.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 2) p 3 (∆ 3 ) ∈ O (3) is an anti-symmetric operation of cohomological degree -1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∈ O (3) is an operation of cohomological degree -1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The unit map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/diamondmath

## Notaion 4.20 . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denote the free non-unital graded commutative algebra generated by one element of weight degree 2 and cohomological degree 2. Let us denote the generator by x . We will denote by C ≤ m the quotient

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of C by the ideal ( x m +1 ) ⊂ C .

Definition 4.21 . Recall that there is a functor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that is the right adjoint corresponding to the map of operads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This functor equips a commutative algebra with a trivial bracket. We define the m -degenerate Poisson operad P ≤ m 1 ∈ Op Comm / by the formula

The operad P ≤ m 1 receives a map from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.22 . By definition, the m -degenerate Poisson operad satisfies a universal property

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, in particular, similarly to [5], Theorem 3.2, computes us the space of m -degenerate Poisson structures on a (differential-graded) commutative algebra in terms of the polyvectors on the latter. /diamondmath

4.4. A simplicial resolution of P ≤ m 1 . In this section we would like to describe a simplicial resolution of the operad P ≤ m 1 . Let k [ x ] ∈ Alg gr Comm denote the unital polynomial ring in 1 variable x of cohomological degree 2 and weight degree 2. Let us also denote by k [ y ] ⊂ k [ x ] its subring given by y ↦→ x m +1 . Recall that there is a simiplicial resolution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of the factor algebra k [ x ] /x m +1 . Moreover, units of the terms of this resolution assemble to a split map

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

of simplicial objects. Cokernel of this map gives us a simplicial resolution

/d111

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

where C ( i ) m denotes free non-unital commutative algebra generated by weight graded complex

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Because functors F and triv P nu 2 Comm nu preserve geometric realizations, the simplicial resolution of C ≤ m gives rise to a simplicial resolution

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d15

/d15

/d15

/d15

/d15

/d15

/d15

/d15

/diamondmath

/diamondmath

of the m -degenerate Poisson operad. Let us denote by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

︸ ︷︷ ︸ weight graded complex (4.23) equipped with a trivial 1-shifted Lie bracket. We note that the equivalence which produces an equivalence of algebras

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

allows us to rewrite the resolution of P ≤ m 1 as

/d111

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

/d111

.

Remark 4.24 . It is possible to describe the terms of the resolution explicitly: Lie { 1 } -algebra L ( i ) m has a barcobar resolution ˜ L ( i ) m , which is a semi-free Lie { 1 } -algebra generated by and equipped with a differential that acts on the generators by the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the weight grading on L ( i ) m uniquely extends to ˜ L ( i ) m under the condition that the differential (4.25) preserves the weight grading and the Lie bracket has weight degree -1. So we obtain that and the latter has an 'explicit' description: it is the operad semi-freely generated over Comm by the antisymmetric homotopy multi-derivations that correspond to the elements of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

together with their homotopy coherences; the operad is equipped with a differential that is induced by (4.25). /diamondmath

Let us note that it follows from this description that each of the terms of the resolution sits in non-positive cohomological degrees, which implies that P ≤ m 1 itself sits in non-positive cohomological degrees. In addition, the resolution allows us to compute the operad H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ).

Proposition 4.26. Operad H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) is isomorphic to factor of P 1 by an operadic ideal generated by the antisymmetrization of the operation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ m +1 ∈ P 1 ( m +1) denotes the m +1 -arity commutative product and l ∈ P 1 (2) denotes the Lie bracket.

Proof. First, let us note that, by the virtue of Proposition 4.15, there is a quasi-isomorphism

Therefore, H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) is isomorphic to factor of P 1 by the image of the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That image is an operadic ideal generated by the operation of P 1 that corresponds to element x m +1 ∈ C (0) m ⊂ k [ x ]. Noting that x itself corresponds to the Lie bracket l ∈ P 1 (2) and unwinding the definition of the product on

Pol( P 1 ), we get the claimed description of the ideal; in Example 4.27, we will perform this calculation in the case where m = 1. /square

Example 4.27 . In this example, we will present a special case of the calculation we skipped in the proof of Proposition 4.26. For degree reasons, the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

factors through the projection ˜ L (0) m -→ k (2)[ -1]. The generator of k (2)[ -1] is sent into a map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that maps ∆ 2 ∈ coComm { 1 } (2) into the Lie bracket l ∈ P 1 (2) and everything else to zero. In agreement with the notation from the proof of Proposition 4.26, we denote this map by x . Here we would like to compute x 2 ∈ Pol( P 1 ). By the definitions from Section 2,

<!-- image -->

˜

where ˜ µ is the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it sends ∆ 2 to the commutative product µ 2 ∈ P 1 (2). (Note that this map is not a map of S 2 -representations and it does not have to be. ) By the composition law of the preLie operad,

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which agrees with the claim of Proposition 4.26.

## 5. Derived degeneracy loci

This section, whose content consists of a few simple observations about the derived degeneracy loci and their classical counterparts, concludes the paper.

Lemma 5.1. Classical induction along the map P 1 -→ H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) sends a discrete Poisson algebra to its classical m -degeneracy locus, see Definition 1.1 for the definition of the latter.

Proof. Recall from Proposition 4.26 that H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) is a factor of P 1 by an operadic ideal, which we denote I ( m +1) ⊂ P 1 . In such a situation, classical induction along the factor map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

sends a discrete P 1 -algebra B into a factor algebra B/I ( m +1) B , where by I ( m +1) B we denote an ideal in B defined as the image of the composite

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/diamondmath

Recalling the description of I ( m +1) ⊂ P 1 from Proposition 4.26, we see that I ( m +1) B ⊂ B is the ideal generated by ( m +1)-th skew power of the Poisson bivector. /square

Definition 5.2 . Let A ∈ A lg P 1 be a Poisson algebra. Its m -th derived degeneracy locus T ≤ m ( A ) is defined as the derived induction ind P ≤ m 1 P 1 ( A ) ∈ A lg P ≤ m 1 of A along the map P 1 -→ P ≤ m 1 ; the operad P ≤ m 1 and the map P 1 -→ P ≤ m 1 were defined in Definition 4.21. /diamondmath

Proposition 5.3. Let A ∈ A lg P 1 be a connective, i.e. sitting in non-positive cohomological degrees, Poisson algebra. Then its degeneracy locus T ≤ m ( A ) is also connective, and the canonical map A -→ T ≤ m ( A ) induces an isomorphism

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of discrete H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) -algebras. In other words, H 0 ( T ≤ m ( A )) is given by the classical m -th degeneracy locus of H 0 ( A ) .

Proof. First, the fact that the functor ind P ≤ m 1 P 1 preserves connective objects follows from the fact that P ≤ m 1 sits in non-positive cohomological degrees.

Let us denote by cl Alg P 1 the 1-category of discrete Poisson algebras. Similarly, we denote by cl Alg H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ) the 1-category of discrete algebras over the operad H 0 ( P ≤ m 1 ). There is a commutative diagram

/d47

/d47

/d47

/d47

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/d15

/d15

/d47

/d47

,

whose arrows are the forgetful functors. Passing to left adjoints and using Lemma 5.1 to describe left adjoint to the left vertical arrow, we obtain a commutative diagram, whose commutativity is given by an isomorphism of the form (5.4). /square

## References

- [1] A. Bondal, 'Non-commutative deformations and poisson brackets on projective spaces,' Max-Planck-Institute preprint , 1993.
- [2] A. Polishchuk, 'Algebraic geometry of poisson brackets,' Journal of Mathematical Sciences , vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1413-1444, 1997.
- [3] M. Gualtieri and B. Pym, 'Poisson modules and degeneracy loci,' Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , vol. 107, no. 3, p. 627-654, Feb 2013. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.4293
- [4] T. Pantev, B. Toen, M. Vaquie, and G. Vezzosi, 'Shifted symplectic structures,' Publications math´ ematiques de l'IH ´ ES , vol. 117, pp. 271-328, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1111.3209v4
- [5] V. Melani, 'Poisson bivectors and poisson brackets on affine derived stacks,' Adv. in Mathematics , vol. 288, pp. 1097-1120, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1863
- [6] D. Calaque, T. Pantev, B. To¨ en, M. Vaqui´ e, and G. Vezzosi, 'Shifted poisson structures and deformation quantization,' Journal of Topology , vol. 10, no. 2, p. 483-584, Apr 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.03699
- [7] V. Melani and P. Safronov, 'Derived coisotropic structures I: affine case,' Selecta Mathematica , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 3061-3118, mar 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.01482
- [8] --, 'Derived coisotropic structures II: stacks and quantization,' Selecta Mathematica , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 3119-3173, mar 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.03201
- [9] J. Loday and B. Vallette, Algebraic Operads , ser. Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.ru/books?id=s9Usr1BK4pwC
- [10] D. Gaitsgory and N. Rozenblyum, A Study in Derived Algebraic Geometry: Volume II: Deformations, Lie Theory and Formal Geometry . volume 221 of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://people.math.harvard.edu/ ∼ gaitsgde/GL/Vol2.pdf
- [11] P. Safronov, 'Braces and poisson additivity,' Compositio Mathematica , vol. 154, no. 8, pp. 1698-1745, jul 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09668
- [12] J. Hirsh and J. Mill` es, 'Curved koszul duality theory,' 2010. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1008.5368
- [13] F. Chapoton and M. Livernet, 'Pre-lie algebras and the rooted trees operad,' IMRN , vol. 8, pp. 395-408, 2001. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0002069
- [14] D. Calaque and T. Willwacher, 'Triviality of the higher formality theorem,' Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , vol. 143, no. 12, pp. 5181-5193, apr 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.4605

[15] V. Dolgushev and T. Willwacher, 'Operadic twisting - with an application to Deligne's conjecture,' 2012. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.2180 [16] D. E. Tamarkin, 'Deformation complex of a d-algebra is a (d+1)-algebra,' 2000. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0010072 [17] V. Hinich, 'Homological algebra of homotopy algebras,' 1997. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/q-alg/9702015

Email address : grisha.v.konovalov@gmail.com