...

-. -

## THE  WHITE HOUSE

## Offi ce  of  the  Press  Secretary

For  Immediate  Release

TO THE CONGRESS  OF THE  UNITED  STATES:

The  success  of  the  American  economy  is  critically  dependent upon  preservation  of  real  opportunity  f or small  business. Historically,  small  business  has  provided  much  of  the  growth in  jobs  and  innovation  as  well  as  being  the  suppl i er  of  services and  deliverer  of  goods  to  virtually  every  f arm, village,  town and  city  in  our  nation. Although  there  are  m any  definitions of  small  business,  the  one  agreed  upon  by  the  1980  White  House Conference  on  Small  Business  was that  of  businesses  employing 500  employees  or  less. , Currently,  approximately  15  million businesses,  or  99  percent,  of  the  total  num ber  of businesses fall  into  this  category.

Small  businesses  are  a  complex  mixture  of  a  wide  variety of  ownership  types,  sizes  and  locations. Published  statistics f rom the  Internal  Revenue  Service  show  that  most  small  busi­ nesses  are  sole  proprietorships. Still,  s ignifi cant  numbers of  partnerships  and  corporations  are  also  small. Bureau  of the  Census  statistics  show  that  small  businesses  appear in al l industry  categories: manufacturing,  t ransportati on, insurance,  wholesale  and  retail t rade  ~ and  every  other  kind of  indus t ry. Small  businesses  vary  in  size: many  have  no employees  (reflecting  either  family-owned  and  operated  or i ndividually-owned  and  operated  businesses);  over  two  million have  between  one  and  20  paid  employees. They  are  located all  across  our  nati on; many  are  in  our  large  citi es  but  a significant  portion  are  in  small  towns. In  truth,  our  small businesses  are  as  diverse  and  di sparate  as  our  population.

This  Administration  is  committed  to  assuring  unrestri cted access  for  small  business  to  all  segments  of  our economy. By unleashing  small  business  from  the  burdens  of  unnecessary taxation  and  regulation,  we  enable  men  and  women  small  business owners  to  increase  their  contributions  to  our  society's economic and  employment  growth. In  addit'  on, we wil l continue  to help  expand  the  opportunities  of  today's struggling  busi ness aspirants,  disadvantaged  ethnic  and  racial  groups , and  to blend  their  skills  and  abilities  in  creating  a  better  life for themselves  and  a  stronger  America.

It  is  the  objecti ve  of  this  statement  to  describe  how this  Administration  is  establishing  an  economic  environment conducive  to  small  business  formation  and  growth. It  first describes  the  economic  contributions  of  small  Dusiness. Second , it  explores  the  foundations  of  this  Administration's small  business  policies. And  last,  examines  problems  and policies  of  special interest to  small  business.

This  statement  draws  from  the  accompanying  Report  on Small  Business  and  Competition  which  contains data  and information  provi ded  by  the  Small  Business  Administration.

## I. THE ROLE OF SMALL  BUSINESS IN THE ECONOMY

The  roots  of  t he  American  economy  are  to  be  found  in the  history  of  small  business. In  America'  s  early  years virtually  all  businesses  were  small. It  was not  until  the advent  of  the  industrial  revolution  in  this  country  that  large

March  1,  1982

businesses  emerged  to  take  advantage  of  economies  of  scale in  production , distribution,  and  marketi ng. Since  the  19th century , the  share  of  our  nati onal  output  of  goods  and  services accounted  for  by  small  business  has  declined. The  decline leveled  off  during  the  1950's,  with  small  business  r esponsible for  producing  just  over  half of  all  private  production . In the  early  1960's,  small  business'  share  began  another  decline, and  today  it  is  responsible  for  slightly  less  than  half  of t he  production  of  goods  and  services  in  our  economy. Clearly, the  recent turmoil  exper' ienced  by  our  economy also  has  taken a toll  on  the  fo rtunes  of  small  business.

Despite  these  trends,  small  business  plays  a  key  role i n  the  U.S.  economy. The  contributions  of  small  business to  innovation  and  employment  have  been  particularly  noteworthy . In  1976,  research  for  the  National  Science  Foundation  showed small  business  had  been  a  more  prolific  source  of  innovations per  research  and  development  dollar  than  medium  or  large busi ness. Inventors  have  often  chosen  to  m a rket their  i nnova­ tions  through  small  business . Small  business  i s,  after  all, ideally  s uited  for such  ventures  by  virtue  of  its  greater flexibility  and  greater  willingness  to  assume  substantial risks  in  the  pursuit  of  potentially  large  r ewards.

Most  small  firms  are  labor  intensive,  and  over  half  of our  labor  force  is  currently  employed  by  small  businesses. Small  businesses  remain  among  the  leaders  in  employment creation. According  t o  research  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute of  Technology,  between  1969  and  1976,  more  than  86  percent of  new jobs  were  provided  by  small  businesses  employing  fewer than  500  empl oyees . Some eighty  percent  of  new j obs  w ere provided  by  firms  having  100  employees  or  less. Almost  66 percent  of  the  new jobs  were  provided  by  businesses  with  fewer than  20  employees,  and  of  the  jobs  provided  by  small  busi nesses , 75  percent  were  attributable  to  firms  that  were  less  than f ive  years  old .

Small  business  has  also  played  an  important  role  in providing  economic  opportuni t ies  for  minori ties  and  w omen, both  as  employees  and  as  entrepreneurs. Minority-owned business  enterprises  are  predominately  small  businesses. Minorities  control  about  4  percent  of  all  businesses  and are  concentrated  in  industries  affording  easy  entry  such  as re tai l trade, services , and  construction. Women  control  about 5  percent  of  all  businesses  and  are  also  in  those  industries affording  easy  entry.

Given  our  nation's  economic  difficulties  we  cannot afford  to  ignore  the  resources  and  potential  contribut i ons of  smal l business  enter prises. Their  innovative  spirit,  their flexibility  t o  meet  new  challenges,  are  crucial  to  our economic  progress. At the  same  time, the  employment  and entrepreneurial opportunities  presented  by  this  sector  are too  important  to  be  less  than  fully  realized. The  bottom line  is  quite  straightforward: America  needs  small  business format i on  and  growth.

## II. THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  SMALL  BUSINESS  POLICY

The  bas ic  problem  of  the  United  States  economy  is  that it  i s not  growing  fast  enough. Since  1973, the  U.S. economy has  grown  at  a  real  rate  of  less  than  2.4  percent,  barely two-thirds  of  the  3. 8  percent  real  growth  rate  experi enced

from  1950  to  1973,  and  far  below  the  4.5  percent  rate  achieved between  1962  and  1969. Why are  we  not  growing? An important reason  is  that  sources  of  growth  have  been  obstructed  by  past Federal  policy  errors. Those  errors  involve  the  tax  code and  its  interaction  with  inflation,  the  excessive  appropria­ tion  of  resources  by  the  government,  and  distortions  in  the use  of  resources  by  unwise  government  intervention  in  the workings  of  the  free  market.

The  fundamental  tenets  of  small  business  policy  are  thus quite  clear. Government  should  promote  a  strong,  vibrant, private  economy  with  policies  that  primarily  rely  upon  free market  forces  to  organize  and  allocate  our  economic  resources. Economic  growth  and  full  employment  must  be  restored  while reducing  inflation  and  interest  rates , and, at  the  same  time, Federal  impediments  to  the  free  and  efficient  use  of  resources must  be  reduced  or  eliminated. The  end  result  should  be  an economy  characterized  by  free  and  open  markets  giving  all of  its  participants  the  opportunity  to  contribute  to,  and share  in, the  high  and  rising  standard  of  living  such  a  system will  produce.

## The  Economic  Recovery  Program

The  cornerstone  of  our  initiative  for  the  small  business sector  is  our  four-part  Economic  Recovery  Program. No  other set  of  actions  by  this  government  is  as  likely  to  correct the  errors  of  the  past  and  have  such  a  pervasive  and  lasting positive  effect  on  small  business. It  consists  of  the following:

1. A  cooperative  effort  with  the  independent  Federal Reserve  Board  to  achieve  a  moderate  and  steady monetary  policy  to  end  inflation. Our  goal  is  to reduce  high  interest  rates  and  remove  disincentives produced  by  the  interaction  of  inflation  with  the tax  code.
2. A  regulatory  reform  program  to  reduce  the  ineffi­ ciencies  and  enormous  costs  that  are  holding  back production  and  raising  prices.
3. An incentive-oriented  tax  policy  designed  to  increase work  effort,  saving,  and  investment.
4. A  stringent  budget  policy  designed  to  return  resources to  the  private  sector  for  investment  and  growth.

Monetary  policy  has  been  aimed  primarily  at  reducing inflation. Our  goal  is  a  moderate  and  steady  growth  of  the money  supply  at  rates  consistent  with  stable  prices. The excessive  money  growth  of  the  1970's  has  left  us  with  double digit  inflation. That  inflat ion  has  increased  interest  rates to  record  levels . Lenders  have  had  to  add  an  inflation  premium to  the  real  interest  rate  in  order  to  protect  their  principal from  erosion. They  have  also  had  to  add  a  risk  premium  to compensate  for  the  increased  uncertainty  of  sharp  and  sudden policy  changes  and  wild  market  swi ngs  such  as  have  occurred in  the  past  three  years.

Generally  high  interest  levels , coupled  with  wide  swings in  interest  rates,  have  been  a  source  of  special  concern  for small  business. More  stable  monetary  policy  is  needed  to make  financial  markets  more  predictable  and  to  prevent discontinuities  in  the  availability  of  capital. This  will result  in  lower, less  volat i le  interest  rates.

Regulatory  relief  is  needed  to  reduce  unnecessary  cos ts imposed  by  government . Government  regulati ons , including paperwork,  have  become  a  major  source  of  market interference, reducing  competition  and  efficiency  within  most  industries. Moreover , regulations  often  have  disproportionately  adverse effects  on  small  businesses,  and  the  result  is  al l too frequently  an  i mpaired  ability  of  small  businesses  to  compete effectively .

Fiscal  policy  has  been  aimed  at  promoting  real  growth. Lower  production  costs  and  more  goods  on  the  shelves  help combat  inflation,  but  t he  main  purpose  of  the  tax  and  spending reductions  is  to  improve  the  incentives  to  work,  save,  and invest. Over  the  years,  inflation  has  destroyed  incentives by  raising  marginal  tax  rates  on  individuals  and  businesses , thereby  reducing  the  rewards  to  labor  and  capital. Both  the business  and  personal  tax  reductions  in  the  Economic  Recover y Tax  Act  of  1981 (ERTA) are  essential  elements  in  restoring these  rewards  to  promote  growth.

Small  business  will  benefit  from the  general  individual tax  r a te  reductions  and  the  indexing  of  tax  brackets  after  1984. Mill ions  of  small  businesses  are  partners hi ps ,  proprietorships and  Subchapter  S  corporations,  the  income  from  which  is  taxed at  personal  rates. In  addition,  the  personal  rate  reductions will  help  restrain  increases  in  labor  costs,  a  prime  concern of  labor  intensive  small  businesses. Small businesses  will benefit  from  other  features  of  ERTA as  well. Among  the  more i m portant  provisions  will  be  the  Accel erated  Cost  Recovery System,  the  ability  to  expense  limi ted  amounts  of  depreciable assets,  increases  in  the  Investment  Tax  Credit  for  used property,  lower  cor porate  tax  rates  for  small businesses, increases  in  the  allowance  for  accumulated  earnings,  and simplified  last-in-fi  rst-out  (LIFO) inventory  accounti ng. The  estate  tax  reductions  in  ERTA significantly  enhance  the ability  of  small,  family-owned  enterprises  to  be  perpetuat ed beyond  the  present  generation,  instead  of  being  liquidated to  meet  excessive  estate  tax  obligations. Other  important provi sions  include  the  expansion  of  the  fun di ng  limitations of  the  Keogh  Plan  and  individual  retirement  accounts (IRAs). These  provisions  are  helpful  to  small  business  in  that  they allow  for  increased  tax  deductions  for  the  more  profitable busi nesses , and  at the  same  time  generate  more  capital  for i nstituti ons  t o  lend  to  small  business.

Spending  restr aint  is  needed  to  retur n  the  real  and financial  resources  now being  absorbed  by  the  government  to the  private  sector  for  use  in  investment  and  growth. The capital  needs  of  the  private  sector,  and  of  small  business in  particular,  have  been  squeezed  by the  growth  of  t he  govern­ ment  sector. The  problem  manifests  itself most  directly  in t he  competition  for  funds  in  the  credit  market,  where  t he growing  deficits  must  be  financed.

Deficits  are  the  evidence  of  the  deeper  problem of  growth of  the  public  sector. When  purchases  and  financial  claims of  government  increase  relative  to  Gross  Nat ional  Product (GNP), it means  fewer  real  and  financial  resources  are  available for  use  by  the  private  sector  to  expand  capacity  and  production. Improving  access  of  small  business  to  needed  resources  requires curtail ing  this  government  preemption  of  the  country's  work force, capital  goods,  raw  materials,  and  productive  capacity, as  well  as  credit. Government  spending  "crowds  out"  the  private sector's  access  to  these  resources  whether  that  spending  is financed  by taxes  or  borrowing.

## III. PROBLEMS  AND POLICIES  OF PARTICULAR  INTEREST

## TO  SMALL  BUSINESS

## Cyclical  Sensitivity

By the  very  nature  of  their  structure , resources,  and to  some  extent  the  types of  activities  in  which  they  participate, small  firms  tend  to  be  highly  susceptible  t o  the  ups  and  downs of  overall  economic  activity. Small  businesses  have  fewer resources  than  large  businesses  to  survive  cyclical  downturns and  are  more  likely  to  fail.

Return  of  economic  growth,  coupled  with  substantial moderation  of  inflation  expected  from  implementat i on  of  our economic  program,  is  therefore  of  particular  interest  to  small business. In  addition,  reduction  of  the  uncertainties  asso­ ciated  with  wide  swings  in  Federal  economic  policy  should result  in  a  business  climate  m ore  conduc ive  to  formation, growth,  and  success  of  small  business  ventures. St abilization will  pay  dividends  for  us  all  but  most  particularly  for  smal l businesses  because  of  their  greater  susceptibility  to  business cycles.

## Inflation

For  the  men  and  women  who  own  small  businesses,  inflation is  a  particularly  serious  problem. It  earns  this  distinction essentially  by  exacerbating  the  other  pr oblems  of  small  bus iness, such  as  need  for  capital,  the  cost  and  availability  of  inves tment funds ,  and  increased  uncertainty  concerning  the  behavior  of the  economy  and  the  posture  of  economic  policies. Small businesses  often  are  in  competitive  markets  where  they  tend to  have  little  control  over  the  costs  they  must  pay  and  the prices  they  are  able  to  charge,  leaving  them  especially vulnerable  to  adverse  price  movements.

The  economic  program of  this  Administrati on  should provide  small  business  with  relief  from  inflation  in  several ways. First ,  adherence  to  a  policy  of  stable  and  limited monetary  growth  should  eliminate  the  primary  engine  of inflation  in  our  economy. Second,  the  improved  incentives and  reduced  labor  costs  flowing  from  the  r eduction  in  Federal personal  income  tax  rates  should  result  in  improved  labor productivity ,  a  matter  of  great  importance  to  small  businesses given  their  tendency  to  be  labor  intens ive . Finally,  help in  controlling  other  costs  of  doing  business  will  be  derived from  the  el imination  of  unnecessary  and  ineff icient  regulatory burdens. Taken  together , therefore,  our  polici es  should  reduce the  extent  of  the  inflation  problem  at  the  s ame  time  the  ability of  small  businesses  to  cope  with  the  inflation  problem  is being  enhanced .

## Interest  Rates

Interest  rates  are  also  a  very  serious  problem  f or  small business. High  interest  rates  cause  severe  cash  flow  problems which  are  particularly  threatening  to  small  businesses. The heightened  sensitivity  to  high  and  volatile  interest  rates stems  from  the  tendency  of  many  small  busi nesses  to  be  under­ capitalized  and/or  to  be  facing  sUbstantial  capital  needs to  finance  growth. The volatil  ity  of  interest  rates  associated with  the  higher  levels  also  works  a  hardship  by  raising  the risk  associ ated  with  investment  and  growth. The  cost  of  capital is  a  significant  cost  of  production,  and  wide  swings  in  interest rates  are  easily  capable  of  producing  ruinous  cost  structures for small  businesses. Moreover , the  deductibi lity  of  interest expense  is  of  less  help  to  small  businesses  since  they  frequently generate  insufficient  income  (particularly  new  ones  just  starting up  operations)  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  tax  deduction.

As  stated  earlier,  the  key  to  lower,  steadier,  interest ra t es  is  a  consistently  lower  rate  of  inflation. When  the inflation  rate  is  high, interest  rates  are  pushed  up  directly by the  need  for  an  inflation  premium  to  protect  the  r eal  value of  the  loaned  funds. In  addition,  the  economi c  instability suggested  by the  presence  of  high  rates  leads  to  a l arger risk  premium  as  well. Because  interest  rates  are  clearly influenced  by inflation,  and  because  the rate  of  inflati on depends  heavily  upon  the  growth  rate  of  money, major  improve­ ment  is  expected  through  our  policy  of  moderate  growth  of money  and  credit. Short-term  movements  in  interes t rates may  evidence  little  progress  at  first,  as  was  illustrated early  in  the  summer  of  1981, but  continued  easi ng  of inflation is  evidence  that conditions  will  improve  as  this  policy  is more  firmly  established.

## Access  To  Capital

There  are  many  impediments  reducing  access  t o  adequate capital,  and  unfortunately  some  of these  work  t o  the  part icular detriment  of  small  business. Sav ing  in  recent  years  has  been depressed  by the  interaction  of inflation  and  the  marginal tax  rates. Inflation  pushes  t axpayers  into  higher  income brackets  which  are  subject  to  progressivel y  higher  rates  of taxation. The  result  has  been  reduced  incentives  to  save and  to  work. Small  business  has  suffered  not  only  from  the general  lack  of  saving,  but  also  because  entrepreneurs  have historically  l ooked  to  family  and  friends  to  supply  the  equity investment  funds  used  as  seed  capital  to  form  new  businesses. When saving  becomes  difficult , these  sources  are  materially diminished.

Small  businesses  also  operate  under  something  of  a  handicap in  the  competition  for business  funds . As  mentioned  earlier, small  size  translates  into  somewhat -greater  vulnerability thus  rai s ing  the  risk  associated  with  any  given  investment in  a  small  business. In  addit i on, economies  of  scale  tend t o  preclude  small  business  participation  from  the  more  impersonal mechanisms  of  our  financial  system. Registration  requirements associated  with  the  public  issuance  of  stock, for  example , can  only  be  afforded  if  the  cost  is  spread  over  a  large  number of  shares. In  the  same  vein, loans  f rom  insurance  companies, large  banks ,  and  other  major  sources  of  investment  capital are  rendered  less  economic  by  the  costly  information  requirements required  by  the  prospective  lenders. Access  of  small businesses to  investment  capital  is  t hus  frequentl y  l imited  to  i ndividuals and  small  banks  which  have  a  personal  relationship  with  the entr e preneur.

Unfortunately,  depressed  saving  rates  and  limited  access are  not  the  only  problems . The  past  tendency  of  the  Federal government  to  rapidl y  expand  its  claims  on  resources  caused either  the  reduced  saving  rates  when  those  claims  were  financed by taxat ion,  or became  a  direct,  competing  claim  on  available saving  if  financed  through  deficits. That  is,  deficits  themselves absorbed  funds  that  would  otherwise  have  been  available  for investment,  making  all  access  points  to  the  flows  of  financial capital  less  able  to  meet  the  demands  placed  upon  them by the  private  sect or. Since  small  businesses  have  had  relatively few  access  points,  t heir'  hardship  has  been  particularly  acute.

The  most  fundamental  policy  t o  improve  small  business access  to  capital is  the  reduction  of  t he  governmental  claims on  resources  expressed  in  the  drive  to  curtail  government spending. Spending  restraint  is  the  key  element  since  either high  taxes  or  borrowing  would  reduce  the  resources  available to  the  private  s ector  for  investment  and  growth.

Unders tanding  the  implications  of  the  def icits  projected for  the  next  few  years , however, is  somewhat  more  complex. The def i ci t alone  does not  determine  the  amount of  crowding out  taking  place  in  t he  financial  market . What  m atter s is the  relationshi p  between  the  deficit  and  t he  suppl y  of  savings needed  to  f i nance  i t . The  first  thing  to  note , t herefore, is  that the  recentl y  enacted  t ax  reducti ons  and  the  new  higher Keogh  Plan  and  I RA  allowances  will  provide  a  powerful stimulus to  saving. Business t a x  reductions  for  1982 , f or  example, will  increase  business  saving; thi s i s  money  that business will  not  need  to  borrow  fr om f inancial  markets. Personal tax  reductions  should  promote  sUbstantial  reall ocat ion  of income  from  consumption  t o  saving,  in  additi  on  t o  t he  normal saving  increase  from  income  growth  alone. Year-over-year , there  should  be  an  increase  in  t otal  private  s aving  fr om  1981 levels  in  excess  of  60  billion  dollars.

The  Economi c  Recovery  Tax  Act  will  improve  smal l busi ness access  to  capital  in  other  ways  as  well. For example , the amount  of  earnings  whi ch  may  be  retained  in  closely  held corporations  without  being  penal ized  by  the  accumulated  earni ngs tax  has  been  increased  from $150 ,000  t o  $250 , 000 . The  change makes  it  possi ble  for  t he  men and  women  who  own  sm al l firms to  accumulate  a  larger amount  of investment  cap ital  wi thout incurring  an  accumulated  earnings  tax. Another  feature  of ERTA is  an  i nc r eas e  in  the  maximum  number  of  shareholders in  Subchapter  S  corporations  from  15  to  25  plus  allowance of  certain  ki nds  of  trusts  to  be  treated  as  shareholder s in such  corporati ons. The  provisions  strengthen  the  at t ractiveness and  utility  of  the  Subchapt er  S  provi s ions.

i nhi bit

Still,  the  pressing  need  among  many  businesses  is  for equi ty  capi tal , not  debt. Repayment  burdens  of  large  loans , r egardless  of  w hether government  or  private  in  orlgln , the  growth  and  format ion  of  new  business es,  especially  t hose owned  by  women  and  minorities.

W e  recognize  the  need  that  small  business  has  f or  new mechani sms  of  constructive  finance. We also  recognize  that s ome  of  the  mechanisms available,  such  as  parti cipat ing debentures,  may  r equire  accommodative  tax  changes i f they are  to  be  effective .

Federal economi c  and  financial  policy  plays a cr uci al role  in  small  bus iness  viability. Thus, it  is  impor tant  that Feder al  departments  i nvolved  in  these  areas be  consistently s ens i tive  to  small  business  needs. I am  directing  the  Commis­ sioner of the  Internal  Revenue  Service  to  include  representatives of small  business in  advisory  groups  which  review  administrat i on of  the  tax  system.

Changes  i n  Feder al policy  affecting  financial  instituti ons will  also  take  into  account  the  impact  on  small  business  needs. The  trend  of  Federal f inancial  reform  movements  has  been  toward providing  a broader array  of  sophisticated  fi nanci al  services f rom  strengthened  and  modernized  institutions  of  al l types in  a  competitive  and  cost  minimizing  market. These  reforms should  continue  t o  i nsure  further  gains  in  s ervices f or depositors  and  borrowers of  all  sizes,  a t lowest possibl e cost,  throughout  the  country  as  well  as  in  financi al centers. The  result  m ay  well  be  the  creation  of  important  new access points  for  small  busi ness  t o  the  flows  of  investment capital.

## Tax  Incenti ves

The  Economic  Recovery  Tax  Act seeks to  provi de  incentives to  increase  asset  purchases  as well  as  t o  encourage  employment growth. Small  business  has  less  than  one- f ourth  of  total

business  assets,  but  employs  over  one-half  of  the  work  f orce. Asset- based  tax  incentives  will  provide  some  direct  economic stimul ation  to  small  business.

i ntensive ,

As noted  earlier,  general  reducti ons in  the  marginal personal  income  tax  rates  and  tax  indexing  will  be  benefi c i al f or small  businesses. Since  most  small  f irms  are  labor their  cost  structures  should  benefit  as  the  impact of  t he t a x  reduction  helps  restrain  increases  in  labor  costs. By reducing,  if  not  eliminating,  bracket  creep,  indexing  will also  moderate  employee  wage  demands. Improvements  i n  wage cost  pressures  will  be  realized  by big  busi nesses as  well, but the  labor  intensive  character  of  small  businesses  means this  provisi  on  will  be  even  more  important  in  their  case.

Small  bus iness  will  also  benefit  from  the  Accelerat ed Cos t Recovery  System  included  in  ERTA. The  direct  share  of thi s benefit  going  into  small  business,  whil e  important,  m ay be  r elat ively  small  since  these  firms  use  less  depreciable pr operty  per dollar  of  sales. On  the  other  hand, to  the  extent small busi nesses  are  suppliers  to  large  capital  intens i ve firms  (and  i n  many  cases  are  producers  of  depreciable  assets themsel ves) , t he capi tal investment  favoring  provisions  of ERTA should  improve  the  market  and  profit  positions  of ma j or parts  of  the  smal l business  sector,  e.g.  firms  in  t he  construc­ ti on  industr y .

W ithin  ERTA there  is  also  an  extensive  list  of  special provi s ions  targeted  specifically  to  small  business. Smal l businesses  wi ll  benefit  from  the  lower  tax  rates  on  the  two lowes t income  brackets,  the  simplification  of  LIFO  inventory accounting,  the  increased  allowance  for  accumulated  earni ngs, more  liberal  treatment  of  stock  option  plans,  the  liberalization of  Subchapter  S  provisions , expanded  expensing  of  depreciabl e assets,  the  larger  allowance  for  the  investment  tax  credit on  used  property,  and  the  expanded  funding  allowances  on Keogh  plans  and  IRAs. And  family-owned  and  closely  held  small business  owners  are  assured  of  continuity  of  ownership  through the  liberalized  estate  and  gift  tax  laws. The  aggregate  amounts of  the  tax  relief  afforded  by  these  tax  provisions  can  involve significant  reductions  in  m arginal  tax  rates  and  t hus  provide powerful  incentives  for  growth  and  development.

## Regulation

Major  increases  in  business  regulation  began  during  the last  decade. The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act , the National  Environmental  Protection  Act,  the  Employee  Ret i rement Income  Security  Act,  and  others , have  served  important  nati onal objecti ves  but  have  also  introduced  distortions  in  the  operat ions of  the  fr ee  market,  impeded  competition,  and  increased  costs of  the  regulated  businesses. Most  of  these  regulati ons  have stipulated  the  same  compl iance  requirements  for  small  business as  f or  large  corporations . The  relative  burden  is  much  great er , however,  because  compliance  costs  cannot  be  spread  out  over l a~g~r quantities  of  output. In  short,  small  business  has found  itself  at  a  competitive  disadvantage  because  of  the exi stence  of  efficiencies  of  scale  in  regulatory  compli ance.

The  problem  is  a  particularly  diffi cult  one. On the one  hand,  regulations  frequently  address  important  soci al obj ect i ves which  cannot  be  dismissed  lightly. On  the o~her hand, their  application  to  small  business  is  frequently  of only  marginal  importance  to  the  social  objectives  involved, or  they  are  applied  in  ways  which  are  inappropriate  in  a  small bus iness  context.

Nevertheless,  difficult  as  the  job  may  be,  this  Admi ni s­ tration  is  committed  to  a  major  effort  in  regulatory  refor m. The  problem  has  been  approached  with  a  two-pronged  eff ort : r e gulatory  relief  and  use  of  regulatory  flexibility. So  f ar

regulatory  rel i ef  has  been  the  maj or pol i cy  tool. Dur ing this  firs t year , r egulatory  relief  has been  actively  pursued in  every  regulatory  agency  and  the  num ber  of  new  regulations issued  has  been  significantly  reduced.

The  Presidential  Task  Force  on  Regulatory  Relief  has announced  a  number  of  existing  regulations  for in-depth  Federal agency  review  which  are  considered  by  small  businesses  to be  most  onerous. Agencies  will  be  expected,  foll owing  t heir review,  to  propose  changes  in  these  regul ations  in  order  to lessen  t he  regulatory  burden  on  America's  small  businesses. It  also  is  timely  to  accelerate  the  review  of  all  existing r egulations  i mposed  on  the  business  sector  to  determi ne  whether maximum  flexibi lity  is  being  provided  to  accommodate  the  uniqueness of  smal l bus inesses. Legislation  enacted  by  the  last  Congress , t he  Regulatory  Flexibility  Act,  provides  the  mechanism  for undertaking  this  effort . The  objective  will  be  t o  assure that  existing  regulations  do  not  unnecessarily  impede  growth and  development  of  small  businesses. At  the  same  time,  we will  keep  in  place  those  r egulations  that  are  benefici al  to society --such  as health  and  safety  in  the  work  place,  and a  healthy  environment .

Full  utilization  of  the  provIsIons  of  the  Regulatory Flexibilit y  Act  will  be  a  principal  theme  of  our  regulatory reform  efforts  over  the  next  three  years. I will  direct  each Federal  department  and  agency  to  accelerate  the  time  f or completion  of  the  review  of  existing  regulati ons as  specified in  the  Regulatory  Flexibility  Act  from  t en  to  five  year s.

Regulatory  flexibility  may  not  be  adequate  to  deal  with the  regul atory  reli ef effort s that  we  have  already  launched in  the  areas  of  banki ng  and  finance. It  i s important  that the  i nt erests of  small  business  be  given  special  attention. I am directing  the  Controller  of  the  Currency  and  asking  t he Chai rs  of  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Bank  Board,  the  Federal  Deposi t Insurance  Corporat ion,  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  to  follow the  Regulatory  Flexibility  Act  guidelines  for  assessi ng  the small  business  impact of  their  proposals  for  changing  our financial  institutions.

The  Securi ti es  and  Exchange  Commissi on  has  already established  an  admirable  record  of  proposing  r egulatory  reform that  wi ll  allow  small  business  men  and  women  to  meet  their of  equity  securities. I encourage  them  to  continue  their equity  capital  needs  more  cheapl y  and  easily  through  the  issuance activities.

In  summary , four economic  problems  plague  small  bus iness , cyclical sensiti vity,  inflation,  interest  rates  and  access to  capital. We addressed  these  problems  with  our  four-pa r t Economic  Recovery  Program: Federal  spending  cuts,  tax  reforms , regulatory  relief  and  stable  monetar y  policy. The  results are  beginning  to  show  -subst antial  decline  in  inflation, a  start  t oward  long-term decline  in  interest  rates  and  i ncreases in  savings to  expand  the  supply  of capital. This  is  not  the time  to  deviate  from  our  program. We  are  breaking  the  bac k of  stagflation. We have  a  solid  economic  program and  we  rej ect pleas  for " quick  fixes"  l ike  those  used  in  the  past. Our program  will  pull  us  out  of  this  slump  and  put  us  on  the  r oad to  prosperity  and  s table  growth  by the  latter  half  of  this year.

## Antitrust

Small  busi nesses rely  upon  the  free  functioning  of  markets to  compete  and  prosper. Our  antitrust  laws  -t he  Sherman and  Clayton  Acts  -protect  t he  competitive  markets  upon  whi ch our free  enterprise  system  is  based. The  ability  of  our  economy to  remain  free  of  illegal  and  anti competiti ve  practi ces  is properly  a  m ajor  concern  of  small  business.

Frequently,  levels  of  concentration  are  considered  an inverse  barometer  of  the  health  of  competition  and  the  small business  community. The  concentration  problem,  however,  may be  somewhat  less  than  meets  the  eye. One type  of  concentration, aggregate  concent ration  (the  extent  to  which  productive  assets , across  all  industr ies,  are  held  by  a limited  number  of  firms of  large  s i ze),  has  not  been  adequately  documented  because the  statistics  are  less  than  per'fect  reflections  of  the  exercise of  control  over  establishments  across  industrial groupings.

Another type  of  concentration,  market,  or  industrial, concentration  (the  extent  to  which  total  sales  of  a  particular industry  are  concentrated  in  several  or  a  few  producers), may  occur  naturally  where  producers  find  economies  of  scale in  production,  distribution  or  marketing. History  also  reveals that  market  concentration  has  waxed  and  waned  in  many industries depending  upon  developments  in  technology.

There  are  numerous  weaknesses  in  the  statistics  bearing on  the  concentration  quest ion. For  one  thing,  they  vary tremendously  from  industry  to  i ndustry; the  service  sector is  highly  unconcentrated  but  growing,  while  the  manufacturing sector  is  more  concentrated  and  shrinking  (as  a  share  of  GNP). Generalizations  about market  power  are  therefore  quite  difficult. Existing  statistics  on  concentration  rati os  also  tend  to  focus on  manufacturing,  ignoring  the  service,  construction,  and other  sectors  where  small  businesses  predominat e.

At  the  theoretical  level  it  is  also  legitimate  to  question whether  concentrat ion  ratios  are,  in  fact,  reasonable  indicators of  the  degree  of  market  power  being  wielded  by  the  participants. Market  power  is,  after  all,  determined  by  the  availability of  acceptable  substitutes,  barriers  to  entry,  and  the  practical geographic  limits  of  the  market  area. The  sole  dry-cleaner in  a small  remote  town , for  example, could  conce ivably  exercise more  market  power  than  a  major  auto  manufacturer  facing  inter­ national  competition. In  the  final  analysis  then, it  must be  recognized  that  concentration  ratios  tell  us  very  little about  the  competitiveness  of  the  markets  within  which  small businesses  operate..

Antitrust  policy  in  general,  and  particularly  merger policy,  is  the  specific  context  in  which  the  Federal  government protects  the  economy  from  illegal  comb inations  of  market  power. The interests  of  small  business  are  best  served  by  an  economically sensible  and  clear ly  stated  merger  policy  that  carefully  examines each  specific  transact i on,  and  inhibits  thos e  transactions that  clearly  threaten  to  restrain  competition. The  Attorney General  will  vi gorously  prosecute  anticompetiti ve  behavior  -­ including,  where  appropriate,  the  use  of  criminal  sanctions  -­ to  protect  competition  and  eliminate  artificial  barriers  to entry. To  the  extent  that  Federal  antitrust  enforcement  can influence  competition,  this  Administration  will  use  its  enforce­ ment  powers  consistently  and  without  hesitation.

This  Administration  also  recognizes  that  there  is  a  variety of  economi c  and  governmental  factors  which  contribute  to  the competitive  capability  of  small  business  and  perhaps  influence the  levels  of  concentration  observed  in  the  economy. Tax, regulatory,  and  fisca l policies  appear  particularly  cri tical, and  are  areas  over  whi ch  the  Federal  government  has  m ajor i nfluence. Our  primary  mission  in  restoring  a  healthy  economy and  the  premium  for  hard  work  and  entrepreneurship, i s to ensure  that  the  unconcentrated  small  business s ectors  can continue  to  grow.

## Research  and  Devel opment,  and  Innovation

Innovation  by independent,  smal l f irms  is  centra l to a  natural  reduction  of  industrial  concentrat i on . The  Federal government  i s the  largest  single  purchaser  of  industrial  research and  development  in  our economy. Until  r ecently,  government purchased  m or e  research  and  developm ent  than  all  other  buyers combined.

In  i t s pur suit  of  effici ency  in  res earch  and  development procurement,  the  government  has  gradually  concentrat ed  i t s purchases  i n  larger f irms and  uni ver s iti es . As  government budgets  have  become t ighter , procurement  officers  have  f ound it  more immediately  eff ic ient to  spend  research  and  developmen t funds in  fewe r large  contracts  rather than  many  small  contracts. At a  minimum,  we need  to  as sure  that  t he  internal  efficiency achieved  by  such  procur ement  practices  are  j us tified  since the  continuat i on  of  t hese  pract ices  wi l l i nevi t ab ly  lead  to increasing  market  concent rati on , at  leas t among  supplier s of  contract  resear ch  and  development. Las t f a ll , I indicated my support  for  Sena te  Bill 881, the  Small  Business  I nnovation Research  Act,  as  i t was passed  by  the  Sena t e . I call  upon Congress  to  pass  t his  Bill  for  m y  s igna t ure  th is  year.

For  small business  firms , cash  ava ilability  is  a  serious limitation  on  t he  amount  of research  and  development  they can  undertake . The  Economic  Recovery  Tax  Act provi des  an incentive  for  research  and  experimentation  by  allowing  a  25 percent  tax  credit  for  cer ta in  research  and  experimentation expendi tures  in  excess  of  a  three-year moving  aver age  base period . The cr ed i t will be in  addition  t o  the  immediate expensing  or  60  month  amortization  of  r esearch  and  exper imen­ tation  expenditures  per mitted  under  present  l aw. Thus , small businesses'  ability  t o  finance  t heir  own  pr ograms should  be materiall y  improved.

I have  al so  requested  the  Attorney  General  to  exami ne ant i t rust  law s to  ensure  that  they  do  not  interfere  wi th  the abi l ity  of  pa tent  and  copyright  holders,  includ i ng  those  in the  smal l busi ness  sector,  to  reap  the  proper rewards  for their  i nnovat i ve  contributions.

## Federal  Pr ocur ement

The  phras e  "industrial  policy"  has  come to  m ean  s ome f orm  of  elaborate  industrial  planning. But  our  indust r i a l poli cy  i s  one  of  establishing  and  maintaining  compet i tive markets. W e  r emain  convinced  that  this  policy  wi l l encourage and  s upport  the  viable  small  business  sector  of  our  economy. Consistent  with  t his  philosophy, the  Admin i strati on is  tak ing steps  to  encourage  competition  in  the  Federal s ec t or.

## Government  Policy  of  Not  Competing  wi t h  Private  I ndus try

The  Admi ni strati on  has  made  a  major  pr iority  the  poli cy of  withdr awing  wherever  possible  from  compet ition  wi th  pr i vate i nd ustry  i n  providing  goods  and  services  to  be  used  by  the Federal  government. Activities  of  all  departments  and  agencies are  being  examined  to  see  which  can  be  conver ted  t o  the  pr ivate sector. For  instance , i n  a  r evi ew  of  440  acti viti es  conducted by  militar y  departments , it  was f ound  that  264 of t hese, or 60 percent,  coul d  be turned  over  to  pri vat e  enterpri se . As t hese  and  other  r equ irements  are  filled  by t he pri vate  s ector rather  than  government  itself,  a  principal benefi ci ary  will be sma l l business .

## Prompt Payment

## on  Government  Contr acts f

The  Admin i s trati on  is  taking  action  to  ensure  t hat  payments are  made  promptly  to  Federal  contractors . Small  bus i ness contractors  ar e  leas t able  t o  wait  for  payment and  wi ll  gai n

the  most  from  prompt  payments  by  the  government. Accordingly , we have  directed  that  all government contracts  contain  clear and  spec ific  instructions  as  to  the  procedure  to  be  followed to  obta in  prompt  payment . Further,  cont racts  must  now  state precisely  when  the  contractor  can  expect  to  be  paid. Addi­ tionally , one  of  the  criteria  we wi ll  be  using  t o  evaluate Federal  employees  who  are  i nvolved  in  the  payment  process will  be  their  performance  in  paying  government  vendors  promptly. Again,  the  Administration  strongly  believes  that  Federal contract  payments  should  be  made  on  time . Also,  we  agree with  the  basic  concept  of  authorizing  through  law  the  payment of  penalty  interest  when  the  government  unreasonably  delays payment  of  a  bill.

## Export

Export  trade  plays  a  vi  ta l role  in  our  economy. In  part, it  brings  social benefit~ of  our  society's  technology  to  other nations  of  the  world  and  it  also  benefits  our  people  wi th increased  employment  and r~turns to  investment  and  helps  pay for  our  imports. Unfortunately,  small  business  has  not participated  in  this  activity  to  the  fullest  possible  extent . Thus, our  exis ting  foreign  trade  promotion  efforts  mus t be more  conscientiously  targeted  to  small  businesses,  to  ass ist them  in  access  to  foreign  markets. I am  directing  the  Depart­ ment  of  Commerce  in  cooperation  with  the  Small  Business Administration  to  emphasize  programs  that  encourage  export promotion  among  small  businesses.

## Equal  Business  Opportunity

This  Administration  is  committed ' to  pursuing  unrestricted access  for  all  business  persons  to  all  segments  of  the  economy. Clearly,  women  and  minority  community  members  represent  the largest  underutilized  resource  of  economic  activity  in  our nation  today . We  are  committed  to  unleashing  this  potential by  removing  barriers  to  their  participation  in  business ownership.

Capital  availabil  ity  for  women  and  minority  entrepreneurs cont inues  to  be  a  significant  problem. This  problem  is  being addressed  at  least  partially  by  the  Federal  Trade  Commission's recent  actions  to  strengthen  enforcement  of  the  Eq ual  Credit Opportunity  Act.

Success  of  minority  and  women-owned  business  is  dependent upon  access  to  resources  and  knowledge  of  bus iness  management methods. The  government  has  traditionally  assisted  minority and  women  business  owners  with  management  and  technical assistance  to  help  overcome  social  and  prejudicial  barriers.

In  r ecognition  of  the  importance  of  the  minority  business assistance  programs , we have  increased  the  program  levels for  SBA's  Minority  Small  Business  program  and  the  Commerce Department's  Minority  Business  Development  Agency  for  fis cal year  1982  as  compared \_ to  fiscal  year  1981. In  addition,  we are  propos ing  to  Congress  that  these  program  levels  be maintained  in . fi~cal years  1983  and  1984. This  includes activities  such  as  financi ng  for  Minor ity  Enterprise  Small Business  Investment  Companies  (MESBICs) . In  addition,  the SBA will direct  a  larger  portion  of  its  guaranteed  loans toward  minority  business  owners.

We intend  to  expand  the  level  of  servi ces  delivered  to the  minority  business  communi ty  by improving  the  quality  and effectiveness  of  service. To  accomplish  this,  the  Cabinet Council  on  Commerce  and  Trade  is  reviewing  all  government assistance  progr ams  for  minority  business  to  determine  how they  can  be  made  more  efficient  and  effective.

•

Thi s  Administration  i s dedicated  t o  the  systematic elimination  of regulatory  and  procedural  barriers  which  have unfairly  precluded  women  from recei ving  equal  treatment  from Federal  activit ies , includ ing  those  activities  affecting  the opportunities  of  women in  business . The  Attorney  General is  systematically  reviewing  Federal laws  and  regulations  in order  to  identi fy  gender-based  di scrimination. He  shall, on  a  quarterly  basi s , report hi s findings  to  me through  the Cabinet Council  on  Human  Resources. The  Task  Force  on  Legal Equity  for  Women , which  I created  recently  by  Executive  Order, will  then  be  responsible  for  implementing  changes  ordered by  me.

In  addition , we will  ensure  that  the  Women' s  Business Enterprise  program in  the  Small  Business  Admin istration  remains an  effective  and  vital  fo rce  advocat i ng  on  behalf  of  present and  potential  women  business  owners. Also, the  SBA's  Office of  Women's  Business  Enterprise  will  emphasize  equal  credit opportunity  for  women  business  owners.

## Small Business  Data  Base

Finally,  it  is  apparent that  the  small  business  sector remains  poorly  documented  in  statistical  data. Existing Federal  data  derived  from  administ rative  records  and  data collection  agencies  and  simply  not  adequate  for  poli cy analysis  and  dec ision  making. Yet , we  are  committed  to r educing  the  paperwork  burden  of  small  businesses  and  there­ fore  reject  any  proposal  to  add  data  collection  mechanisms to  those  curr ently  in  existence. At  the  same  time,  existing Federal  data  may  be  better  organized  and  coordinated  among agencies  to  help  build  a  data  base  mor e  suitable  for  small business  policy  making. To this  end, the  proposal  for  Federal agencies  to  compile  stat istics  on  business  size  on  a  comparable basis  will  enhance  analyses  of  the  small  business  sector. We are  planning  for - agencies  t o  provide  business  size  data on this  uniform  basis . Analysis  of  the  small  business  sector would  also  be  furthered  by sharing  of  selected  data  among statistical  agencies,  and  w e  are  examining  ways  of  accomplish­ ing  this  within  the  constraints  of  privacy  and  confidentiality requirements.

SBA' s  data  base,  which  is  drawn  from  commercially  available da ta,  places  no  additional  paperwork  burden  upon  small  business, allows  maintenance  of  confidential i ty  commitments to  small business,  and  provides  policy  relevant  data . Thus, this  data base  must  be  continued  and  we have  given  it  priority  in  our 1983  budget  proposals. I am  asking  the  Congress  to  enact my budget  proposal  for  SBA's  small  business  data  base. Also, I am requesting  t he  SBA to  increase  the  resources  allocated to  this  work  and  to  incl ude  minority  and  women-owned  business data  within  its  data  base.

## IV. SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS

In  conclusion , the  import ance  of  the  small  business sector  cannot  and  should  not  be  ignored. For  me, small business  is  the  heart  and  soul of  our  free  enterpri se  system. The  small  business  sector has  played , and  continues  to  play, an  important part  in  providing  innovative  drive  and  employment growth  in  the  Ameri can  economy. To  help  small  business  realize its  full  economic  potent i al,  this  Administrat ion  is  pursuing an  economic  policy  aimed  at  getting  the  Ameri can  economy  growing again, together with  programs  designed  t o  assure  unrestricted access  by  everyone  to  economi c  resources  and  markets.

The  essential parts  of  such  an  economic  program  ar e  already in  place. An  effe ct ive  mechanism  f or  achieving  regulatory reform  has  already  been  establi shed . A policy  of  stable, moderate ,  monetary  restraint  must be  followed. A  fiscal  policy calling  for  budgetar y  restraint  coupled  with  important  new tax  incenti ves  for work, savi ng, and investment  is  being  put into  practi ce . Moreover,  within  t he  context  of  this  fo urpart  program , t he  major  problems  of -particular  interest to small  bus i ness  are  being  effectively  addressed. These  pr oblem s range  from inflation, high  interest  rates,  access  to  cap i tal, and  regul ation  to  r esearch  and  development , export  and  equal business  opportuni t i es.

Thi s s ta t ement  and  the  following  report  are  the  first present ed  t o  Congress  as  required  in  Title  III  of  Public Law 96-302 . It  has  been  prepared  to  meet  both  the  letter and  intent  of  the  l aw and ~rovide a  comprehensive  description of  the  state  of  smill business. It  is  hoped  the  r epor t wi l l est abl ish  a  spirit  of cooperation  with  Congress  t o  assi st us  i n  joint ly  pur s ui ng  economic  growth  and  prosperity  through our  mutual recogniti on  of  t he  importance  of small  business i n  Ameri ca.

RONALD REAGAN

#

#

THE WHITE  HOUSE,

March  1,  1982 .

#

#

#